Essentials of Glycobiology, Fourth Edition
This free download of
Essentials of Glycobiology
, Fourth Edition is made possible by generous financial support from InterVenn Biosciences.

Essentials of Glycobiology, Fourth Edition
Full text of this work and associated links and downloadable PowerPoint slides of all of the figures are available at
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/glyco4

Essentials of Glycobiology, Fourth Edition
Essentials of
Glycobiology
FOURTH EDITION
E
DITED
BY
Ajit Varki
Richard D. Cummings
Jeffrey D. Esko
Pamela Stanley
Gerald W. Hart
Markus Aebi
Debra Mohnen
Taroh Kinoshita
Nicolle H. Packer
James H. Prestegard
Ronald L. Schnaar
Peter H. Seeberger
COLD SPRING HARBOR LABORATORY PRESS
Cold Spring Harbor, New York •
www.cshlpress.org

Essentials of Glycobiology, Fourth Edition
Essentials of Glycobiology
, Fourth Edition
All rights reserved
© 2022 by the Consortium of Glycobiology Editors, La Jolla, California
Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, New York
Library of Congress Control Number: 2021950841
Publisher and Acquisition Editor
John Inglis
Senior Project Manager
Inez Sialiano
Permissions Coordinator
Carol Brown
Production Editor
Kathleen Bubbeo
Production Manager
Denise Weiss
Cover Designers
Lorenzo Casalino and Rommie Amaro
Illustrator and Illustrations Coordinator
Richard D. Cummings
Front cover artwork
:  Molecular representation of the full-length, fully glycosylated, all-atom model of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein in the open state, embedded in the viral membrane. The model of the spike has been developed by Casalino et al. (
ACS Cent Sci
6:
1722–1734 [2020]) based on the cryo-EM structure by Wrapp et al. (
Science
367:
1260–1263 [2020]) (PDB ID: 6VSB). N-/O-glycans have been modeled according to Watanabe et al. (
Science
369:
330–333 [2020]) and Shajahan et al. (
Glycobiology
30:
981–988 [2020]).
On the
left
, the full-length SARS-CoV-2 spike in the open state—that is, with one receptor binding domain (RBD) in the “up” conformation—is shown with a cyan transparent surface overlaid on the cartoon representation of its secondary structure. The conformation of the spike was selected from molecular dynamics simulations performed by Casalino et al. (
ACS Cent Sci
6:
1722–1734 [2020]). N-linked and O-linked glycans are depicted using the Symbol Nomenclature for Glycans (SNFG), in which blue filled squares are for
N
-acetyl-D-glucosamine (GlcNAc), green filled circles for D-mannose, yellow filled squares for
N
-acetyl-D-galactosamine (GalNAc), yellow filled circles for D-galactose (Gal), red filled triangles for L-fucose (Fuc), and purple filled diamonds for
N
-acetyl-D-neuraminic acid (Neu5Ac). The lipid bilayer of the viral membrane is depicted with a surface representation, in which the POPC (1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine) are colored in pink, POPE (1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine) in purple, POPI (1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoinositol) in orange, POPS (1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoserine) in red, and cholesterol in yellow.
On the
right
, the glycan shield (dark-blue bush-like structures) in the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein (cyan transparent surface) is shown by overlaying multiple conformations of the N-linked and O-linked glycans obtained at multiple, interspersed frames along 1 μsec of molecular dynamics simulations (Casalino et al.,
ACS Cent Sci
6:
1722–1734 [2020]). For each glycan, each conformation sampled along the dynamics is shown with dark-blue sticks. When multiple conformations of each glycan are overlaid, they form a protective bush-like structure providing a visual representation of the extent of protein surface covered over a specific time frame. When the receptor-binding domain (RBD), located in the apical portion of the spike, is in the “up” conformation, it emerges from the glycan shield (as shown in the image with transparent cyan surface) and becomes available for binding to the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptors located on the host cell. The binding event between the RBD and ACE2 initiates infection.
The cover artwork was designed and created by Dr. Lorenzo Casalino in the Amaro Laboratory (University of California San Diego), based on the all-atom model published in
ACS Cent Sci
6:
1722–1734 (2020).
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Identifiers: LCCN 2021950841 | ISBN 978-1-621824-21-3 (hardcover) | ISBN 978-1-621824-22-0 (ePub3)
All World Wide Web addresses are accurate to the best of our knowledge at the time of printing.
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the internal or personal use of specific clients, is granted by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, provided that the appropriate fee is paid directly to the Copyright Clearance Center (CCC). Write or call CCC at 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923 (978-750-8400) for information about fees and regulations. Prior to photocopying items for educational classroom use, contact CCC at the above address. Additional information on CCC can be obtained at CCC Online at
www.copyright.com.
For a complete catalog of all Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press publications, visit our website at
www.cshlpress.org.
Financial support for the free download of this e-book does not imply endorsement of InterVenn’s products and services by the Consortium of Glycobiology Editors, the book’s copyright holder, nor Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, the book’s publisher.

Essentials of Glycobiology, Fourth Edition
Contents
Foreword
Preface
Praise for the Previous Editions of
Essentials of Glycobiology
Contributors
Editors of Earlier Editions
Consultant Reviewers
Classic Books and Monographs
Abbreviations
GENERAL PRINCIPLES
1
Historical Background and Overview
Ajit Varki and Stuart Kornfeld
2
Monosaccharide Diversity
Peter H. Seeberger
3
Oligosaccharides and Polysaccharides
Carlito B. Lebrilla, Jian Liu, Göran Widmalm, and James H. Prestegard
4
Cellular Organization of Glycosylation
Karen J. Colley, Ajit Varki, Robert S. Haltiwanger, and Taroh Kinoshita
5
Glycosylation Precursors
Hudson H. Freeze, Michael Boyce, Natasha E. Zachara, Gerald W. Hart, and Ronald L. Schnaar
6
Glycosyltransferases and Glycan-Processing Enzymes
James M. Rini, Kelley W. Moremen, Benjamin G. Davis, and Jeffrey D. Esko
7
Biological Functions of Glycans
Pascal Gagneux, Thierry Hennet
,
and Ajit Varki
8
A Genomic View of Glycobiology
Nicolas Terrapon, Bernard Henrissat, Kiyoko F. Aoki-Kinoshita, Avadhesha Surolia, and Pamela Stanley
STRUCTURE AND BIOSYNTHESIS
9
N-Glycans
Pamela Stanley, Kelley W. Moremen, Nathan E. Lewis, Naoyuki Taniguchi, and Markus Aebi
10
O-GalNAc Glycans
Inka Brockhausen
,
Hans H. Wandall, Kelly G. Ten Hagen
,
and Pamela Stanley
11
Glycosphingolipids
Ronald L. Schnaar, Roger Sandhoff, Michael Tiemeyer
,
and Taroh Kinoshita
12
Glycosylphosphatidylinositol Anchors
Sneha Sudha Komath, Morihisa Fujita, Gerald W. Hart, Michael A.J. Ferguson, and Taroh Kinoshita
13
Other Classes of Eukaryotic Glycans
Robert S. Haltiwanger, Lance Wells, Hudson H. Freeze, Hamed Jafar-Nejad, Tetsuya Okajima, and Pamela Stanley
14
Structures Common to Different Glycans
Pamela Stanley, Manfred Wuhrer, Gordon Lauc, Sean R. Stowell, and Richard D. Cummings
15
Sialic Acids and Other Nonulosonic Acids
Amanda L. Lewis, Xi Chen, Ronald L. Schnaar, and Ajit Varki
16
Hyaluronan
Melanie Simpson, Liliana Schaefer, Vincent Hascall, and Jeffrey D. Esko
17
Proteoglycans and Sulfated Glycosaminoglycans
Catherine L.R. Merry, Ulf Lindahl, John Couchman, and Jeffrey D. Esko
18
Nucleocytoplasmic Glycosylation
Christopher M. West, Chad Slawson, Natasha E. Zachara, and Gerald W. Hart
19
The O-GlcNAc Modification
Natasha E. Zachara, Yoshihiro Akimoto, Michael Boyce, and Gerald W. Hart
GLYCANS IN EVOLUTION AND DEVELOPMENT
20
Evolution of Glycan Diversity
Pascal Gagneux, Vladislav Panin, Thierry Hennet, Markus Aebi, and Ajit Varki
21
Eubacteria
Chris Whitfield, Christine M. Szymanski, Amanda L. Lewis, and Markus Aebi
22
Archaea
Benjamin H. Meyer, Sonja-Verena Albers, Jerry Eichler, and Markus Aebi
23
Fungi
Françoise H. Routier, Tamara L. Doering, Richard D. Cummings, and Markus Aebi
24
Viridiplantae and Algae
Malcolm A. O'Neill, Alan G. Darvill, Marilynn E. Etzler, Debra Mohnen, Serge Perez, Jenny C. Mortimer, and Markus Pauly
25
Nematoda
Iain B.H. Wilson, Katharina Paschinger, Richard D. Cummings, and Markus Aebi
26
Arthropoda
Kelly G. Ten Hagen, Hiroshi Nakato, Michael Tiemeyer, and Jeffrey D. Esko
27
Deuterostomes
Michael Pierce, Iain B.H. Wilson, Katharina Paschinger, and Pamela Stanley
GLYCAN-BINDING PROTEINS
28
Discovery and Classification of Glycan-Binding Proteins
Maureen E. Taylor, Kurt Drickamer, Anne Imberty, Yvette van Kooyk, Ronald L. Schnaar, Marilynn E. Etzler, and Ajit Varki
29
Principles of Glycan Recognition
Richard D. Cummings, Ronald L. Schnaar, Jeffrey D. Esko, Robert J. Woods, Kurt Drickamer, and Maureen E. Taylor
30
Structural Biology of Glycan Recognition
Jesús Angulo, Jochen Zimmer, Anne Imberty, and James H. Prestegard
31
R-Type Lectins
Richard D. Cummings, Ronald L. Schnaar, and Yasuhiro Ozeki
32
L-Type Lectins
Richard D. Cummings, Marilynn E. Etzler, T.N.C. Ramya, Koichi Kato, Gabriel A. Rabinovich, and Avadhesha Surolia
33
P-Type Lectins
Nancy Dahms, Thomas Braulke, and Ajit Varki
34
C-Type Lectins
Richard D. Cummings, Elise Chiffoleau, Yvette van Kyook, and Rodger P. McEver
35
I-Type Lectins
Takashi Angata, Stephan von Gunten, Ronald L. Schnaar, and Ajit Varki
36
Galectins
Richard D. Cummings, Fu-Tong Liu, Gabriel A. Rabinovich, Sean R. Stowell, and Gerardo R. Vasta
37
Microbial Lectins: Hemagglutinins, Adhesins, and Toxins
Amanda L. Lewis, Jennifer J. Kohler, and Markus Aebi
38
Proteins That Bind Sulfated Glycosaminoglycans
Ding Xu, James H. Prestegard, Robert J. Linhardt, and Jeffrey D. Esko
GLYCANS IN PHYSIOLOGY AND DISEASE
39
Glycans in Glycoprotein Quality Control
Tadashi Suzuki, Richard D. Cummings, Markus Aebi, and Armando Parodi
40
Free Glycans as Bioactive Molecules
Antonio Molina, Malcolm A. O'Neill, Alan G. Darvill, Marilynn E. Etzler, Debra Mohnen, Michael G. Hahn, and Jeffrey D. Esko
41
Glycans in Systemic Physiology
Robert Sackstein, Sean R. Stowell, Karin M. Hoffmeister, Hudson H. Freeze, and Ajit Varki
42
Bacterial and Viral Infections
Amanda L. Lewis, Christine M. Szymanski, Ronald L. Schnaar, and Markus Aebi
43
Parasitic Infections
Richard D. Cummings, Cornelis H. Hokke, and Stuart M. Haslam
44
Genetic Disorders of Glycan Degradation
Hudson H. Freeze, Richard Steet, Tadashi Suzuki, Taroh Kinoshita, and Ronald L. Schnaar
45
Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation
Dirk J. Lefeber, Hudson H. Freeze, Richard Steet, and Taroh Kinoshita
46
Glycans in Acquired Human Diseases
Robert Sackstein, Karin M. Hoffmeister, Sean R. Stowell, Taroh Kinoshita, Ajit Varki, and Hudson H. Freeze
47
Glycosylation Changes in Cancer
Susan L. Bellis, Celso A. Reis, Ajit Varki, Reiji Kannagi, and Pamela Stanley
METHODS AND APPLICATIONS
48
Glycan-Recognizing Probes as Tools
Richard D. Cummings, Marilyn Etzler, Michael G. Hahn, Alan Darvill, Kamil Godula, Robert J. Woods, and Lara K. Mahal
49
Glycosylation Mutants of Cultured Mammalian Cells
Jeffrey D. Esko, Hans H. Wandall, and Pamela Stanley
50
Structural Analysis of Glycans
Stuart M. Haslam, Darón I. Freedberg, Barbara Mulloy, Anne Dell, Pamela Stanley, and James H. Prestegard
51
Glycomics and Glycoproteomics
Pauline M. Rudd, Niclas G. Karlsson, Kay-Hooi Khoo, Morten Thaysen-Andersen, Lance Wells, and Nicolle H. Packer
52
Glycoinformatics
Kiyoko F. Aoki-Kinoshita, Matthew P. Campbell, Frederique Lisacek, Sriram Neelamegham, William S. York, and Nicolle H. Packer
53
Chemical Synthesis of Glycans and Glycoconjugates
Peter H. Seeberger and Hermen S. Overkleeft
54
Chemoenzymatic Synthesis of Glycans and Glycoconjugates
Hermen S. Overkleeft and Peter H. Seeberger
55
Chemical Tools for Inhibiting Glycosylation
David J. Vocadlo, Todd L. Lowary, Carolyn R. Bertozzi, Ronald L. Schnaar, and Jeffrey D. Esko
56
Glycosylation Engineering
Henrik Clausen, Hans H. Wandall, Matthew P. DeLisa, Pamela Stanley, and Ronald L. Schnaar
57
Glycans in Biotechnology and the Pharmaceutical Industry
Peter H. Seeberger, Darón I. Freedberg, and Richard D. Cummings
58
Glycans in Nanotechnology
Martina Delbianco, Benjamin G. Davis, and Peter H. Seeberger
59
Glycans in Bioenergy and Materials Science
Malcolm A. O'Neill, Robert J. Moon, William S. York, Alan G. Darvill, Kamil Godula, Breeanna Urbanowicz, and Debra Mohnen
60
Future Directions in Glycosciences
Gerald W. Hart and Ajit Varki
Glossary
Study Guide
Index

Essentials of Glycobiology, Fourth Edition
Foreword
T
HE GOAL OF BARRIER-FREE ACCESS TO SCHOLARLY
information online has preoccupied academic researchers for more than two decades. The debates have focused principally on how to liberate research papers from the constraints of journal subscriptions. But in more recent years, as more and more journals have become open access, the spotlight has shifted to books, including textbooks, and the challenge of making their content freely available to readers while retaining financial viability. Amid the arguments about paths forward, the 20-year success of
Essentials of Glycobiology
in achieving the goal is less well-known than it should be. That success is attributable to a unique partnership between two not-for-profit institutions and a consortium of scientist–editors led by the book's executive editor, the indefatigable Ajit Varki.
The first edition of
Essentials of Glycobiology
was published in 1999, in the same year that the Director of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), Harold Varmus, proposed creating a freely available archive of all new research manuscripts. The radical “Ebiomed” scheme did not gain traction but, pushed by Ajit, then its Editor-in-Chief,
The Journal of Clinical Investigation
was already making all its articles freely available online at publication. This bold gambit had greatly expanded the readership of the journal's content. Inspired by this success, and as an energetic proselyte for the emerging, cross-disciplinary field of glycobiology, Ajit was eager to give his field the widest possible audience. So, on publication of the textbook, discussion began with its publisher, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, about ways of making its content freely available. The idea of an open-access book was intriguing to an institution with a 100-year history of innovation in the communication of science.
The National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI), a division of the National Library of Medicine at NIH, was led by another entrepreneurial scientist interested in breaking barriers to information flow, David Lipman. Among NCBI's innovations was the creation of Bookshelf, a platform for open distribution of book content. Brokered by Ajit and his colleagues, the Consortium of Glycobiology Editors, who collectively owned the copyright of
Essentials in Glycobiology
, an agreement was forged between the Laboratory and NCBI that enabled the full text of the book to be discovered, searched, and read online on the Bookshelf, while the print edition remained available for sale through the Press. The risk, seemingly significant at the time, was that the availability of a free, high-quality rendition of the book's content online would limit print sales and prevent the Press from recovering the investment required to create the book.
The online edition of
Essentials
appeared in 2003 and its usage was substantial, with hundreds of people each week from all over the world continuing to consult it even five years later. The content was discoverable through indexing by major search engines, citations in Wikipedia, listing and linking by libraries, and entries in PubMed. And gratifyingly, interest in the print edition did not appear to waver. So, in 2008, when a second edition of
Essentials
was ready for publication, another bold decision was taken, to release both the print and Bookshelf editions simultaneously, the first time this had been done with a major textbook. And once again, the gambit paid off, as sales of the print book prospered while usage of the online content was brisk. The same approach was adopted for the third edition in 2017. And now, for this fourth edition, the project continues to evolve, as the freely accessible Bookshelf edition is released simultaneously with both a print edition and an e-book downloadable exclusively from the Press website that can be read easily on a variety of portable devices.
Nearly two decades after the editors, NCBI, and the Press embarked on this joint venture, devotees of glycobiology have more choices than ever in how they consult and use the content of the latest
Essentials.
Tastes and information habits have changed greatly during that time—a print edition of such a large book now has much less appeal to readers, despite the elegance of its design and illustrations by Consortium member Rick Cummings and its high production values. But the mission of
Essentials
has not changed. The Consortium of Glycobiology Editors remains substantially intact but has also recruited a new generation of younger authors who can carry the torch forward in the future. With each edition, they collectively strive to create an up-to-date knowledge resource that will satisfy established investigators but also entice new recruits to the study of the important, diverse, and expanding biology of the glycans. CSHL Press and successive leaders at NCBI remain committed to ensuring that the information the editors have curated reaches the widest possible audience, however and wherever those individuals want to use it. On behalf of our organizations, we congratulate The Consortium of Glycobiology Editors on creating another remarkable, important, and pioneering contribution to the literature of Glycoscience.
John Inglis
Executive Director and Publisher
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
Rita Sarkar
Program Officer National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI)
National Institutes of Health
Stephen T. Sherry
Acting DirectorNational Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI)
National Library of Medicine

Essentials of Glycobiology, Fourth Edition
Preface
B
ECAUSE THIS IS THE FOURTH EDITION OF THIS BOOK
, it seems appropriate to look back to the origins of the project and to acknowledge the many individuals and organizations that have contributed. Such memories of the past are not stored in our brains like computer files but must rather be reconstituted each time we recall, making them prone to fade and/or “mutate” over time. But since the 1990s, we have archived e-mails and other electronic records to cross-check if our memories are accurate. Digging through such archives and contacting various people, I was able to reconstitute a reasonably accurate (although likely incomplete) history below.
Until the 1970s, the study of biological systems included equal attention to all major classes of macromolecules: nucleic acids, proteins, lipids, and glycans. But by the end of the 1980s, most popular books, monographs, and manuals about Molecular Biology had a strong emphasis on DNA, RNA, and proteins, with some attention to lipids, but effectively leaving out glycans, which were poorly understood, far more complex, diverse, and difficult to study. This anomaly also affected the popular
Current Protocols in Molecular Biology
, established in 1987 by experts at Harvard, in collaboration with Sarah Greene of Greene Publishing Associates. But one of the editors (the late John Smith, who was biochemically inclined) proposed to the board a chapter about glycans. Apparently, this proposal came after discussions with John Coligan at NIH (later an editor of
Current Protocols in Immunology
). The outcome was a series of Units on Preparation and Analysis of Glycoconjugates, led by Adriana Manzi, Hud Freeze, and myself and coordinated by Kaaren Janssen as the Series Editor.
By the 1990s, the now somewhat segregated minority of scientists working primarily on glycans had embraced Raymond Dwek's term “Glycobiology” and a Society and Journal of the same name followed. At UC San Diego, a small group of afficionados had formed a Glycobiology Program within the UCSD Cancer Center and, along with the Division of Cellular and Molecular Medicine (created by George Palade and Marylin Farquhar), recruited Jamey Marth and then Jeff Esko—while also collaborating with a parallel program at the La Jolla Cancer Research Foundation (now Sanford Burnham Prebys) to organize an annual San Diego Glycobiology Symposium. A graduate-level, elective course entitled “Essentials of Glycobiology” had already been taught at UCSD for many years, and it seemed logical to convert it into a textbook. In a December 23, 1996 e-mail to the Glycobiology Program members, I wrote that “[w]hile I was at the GlycoImmunology meeting in Greece, I had a long talk with Jerry Hart and Rick Cummings about their proposed Glycobiology Book. They were interested in the possibility of combining forces with our group to do a Glycobiology course and produce a book in 1998.” Working together, we were able to put together a “Consortium of Glycobiology Editors” (CGE) who proposed a graduate-level textbook called
Essentials of Glycobiology
.
In looking for a publisher, we had the advantage of the prior connection with Kaaren Janssen (mentioned above), who was now at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press (CSHLP), and who introduced us to John Inglis, the Executive Director of the Press. After considering some options, it was an easy choice to make an agreement with the highly prestigious and nonprofit CSHLP. An additional major consideration was John's forward-thinking willingness to consider our rather unusual request: to make the entire book freely available for online searching and reading. This first-of-its-kind example for a major textbook was possible because of yet another coincidence—I had just finished a stint as Editor in Chief of the
Journal of Clinical Investigation
(JCI), during which we took advantage of the online presentation of the journal (a new concept) to also make it free to all readers. This approach was later called “open access.”
The success of the JCI experiment generated an invitation to the PubMed Central Advisory Committee from David Lipman, then the new Director of the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) of the National Library of Medicine—the home of GenBank, PubMed, and many other free online bioinformatic resources. Lipman did not hesitate to accept a proposal from the editors and CSHLP to make the entire book freely available at NCBI Bookshelf for searching and reading by anyone anywhere in the world with an internet connection—eventually including downloadable slides for each figure. Jo McEntyre (followed by Marilu Hoeppner) at NCBI worked closely with the Press and the editors to make this all possible. Since the recent departure of Lipman from NCBI, we were fortunate that the NCBI leaders who followed (Jim Ostell and now Steve Sherry) have continued their support of the online version. Although the Office of the NIH Director later considered supporting the effort, they could not do so without a national competition, and an anonymous donor stepped in to help the Press partially absorb the costs. But the editorial “office” still needed administrative support. Fortunately, a long-standing, glycobiology-focused program project from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) to members of the UCSD Glycobiology Research and Training Center (GRTC; co-directed by Jeff Esko and myself) could be used to support such efforts, followed by the NHLBI Programs of Excellence in Glycosciences (2011–2019), and then a National Career Development Consortium for Excellence in Glycosciences (K12, 2018–2023), which focused on immersive postdoctoral training in all aspects of glycosciences. All NHLBI support for these programs (and hence for the book) was spearheaded by program officer Rita Sarkar, without whose dedication and relentless support none of this would have happened.
As with the last edition, the editors of the CGE (now registered as a U.S. nonprofit association) have agreed to do this work purely as a service to the scientific community and will not be accepting any personal income from the book. Rather, we will be assigning any remaining income, after covering production costs, to further the impact of the book in the glycoscience community. Editors of the earlier editions have agreed to forward residual income from that edition toward the same goal.
Two other spinoffs that the NCBI supported with the third edition are now independently run by internationally representative committees: the NCBI Glycans Page (led now by Natasha Zachara) and the Symbol Nomenclature for Glycans (SNFG; led now by Sriram Neelamegham). Another special feature of the book has been the outstanding artwork executed largely by Rick Cummings (in this and all previous editions) and the downloadable slides of all figures. Special thanks also to Lorenzo Casalino and Rommie Amaro for the images of the COVID spike protein on the front cover of this edition.
Over the four editions, we have had progressive improvements in gender balance among editors and coauthors from the first to the current edition (from 8% to 39% female), the total number of editor and coauthors (from 13 to 131 participants), and in international participation (from 8% to 56%). Usage statistics from NCBI indicate access by almost 2,036,226 unique IP addresses in 2,213,203 sessions since 2011. Many kudos are due to the CSHLP Team (Denise Weiss, Kathleen Bubbeo, Inez Sialiano, Carol Brown, and Mala Mazzullo), the NCBI Bookshelf team (Stacy Lathrop, Kim Pruitt, Susan Douglas, Diana Jordan, and Jeff Beck), Evan Bolton at PubChem, and last but definitely not least, Amanda Cuervo, the “Glycobook Administrator” at the UCSD GRTC, who coordinated everything.
Most editors of this fourth edition are “Boomers” like me and will likely not be involved in the next one. Thus, the future of the book, and the field, will be determined by a younger generation of afficionados such as those we have recruited as coauthors in the current edition. We hope they will complete the process of reintroducing glycans back into the mainstream of “molecular biology.”
Ajit Varki
for the Consortium of Glycobiology Authors

Essentials of Glycobiology, Fourth Edition
Praise for the Previous Editions of
Essentials of Glycobiology
FIRST EDITION
“Glycobiology is a field undergoing spectacular advances that progressively reveal the critical role of glycoproteins and proteoglycans in the organization and function of eukaryotic cells, especially in multicellular organisms. Glycobiology is … poised for further major advances in the immediate future. This book … will greatly help all those ready to enter this challenging, yet promising field.”
–
George E. Palade
,
Nobel Laureate in Medicine, 1974
“Precise laws govern the linear sequences of nucleic acids and proteins, but what about complex carbohydrates? Is there a carbohydrate code? Do carbohydrate sequences dictate the behavior of the proteins and lipids that carry them? This book provides the background necessary to answer these timely questions. In the Era of Functional Genomics, this book will be indispensable to anyone who encounters a new molecule with an unknown sugar modification.”
–
Michael S. Brown and Joseph L. Goldstein,
Nobel Laureates in Medicine, 1985
“As the literature that is available to biological scientists continues to expand at an ever increasing rate we tend to specialize … This practice is, of course, fraught with dangers. The most exciting developments are often those that bring together knowledge from one area and show that it is applicable to another … Thus,
Essentials of Glycobiology
will be of great value to all of us and will be important for people working in essentially all branches of biology.”
–
Edwin G. Krebs
,
Nobel Laureate in Medicine, 1992
“The prefix glyco- strikes dread into the hearts of many molecular biologists … Thank heavens for this new treatise on Glycobiology, which does much to demystify this complex area. The treatment is logical and thorough, yet individual topics are presented with refreshing brevity. Although the inherent biology of glycosylation is poorly understood, what is known is presented with clarity and rigor. This is the textbook I wished for six years ago, when I developed an interest in the area. I recommend it as a knowledgeable and readable source of information …”
–
Richard J. Roberts
,
Nobel Laureate in Medicine, 1993
SECOND EDITION
“My own research career has repeatedly intersected with glycobiology—ganglioside affinity purification of
E. coli
enterotoxin, isolation of red cell Rh blood group antigens, and molecular elucidation of N-glycosylated aquaporin water channels. The biological importance of these
carbohydrates was always intriguing but at times confusing. The availability of the second edition of
Essentials of Glycobiology
now provides succinct coverage of this important area of science for non-experts, like me, as well as the cognoscenti. The basic principles of glycobiology are clearly articulated in this volume, and the roles of complex carbohydrates in disease are an important read for all biomedical scientists.”
–
Peter Agre
,
Nobel Laureate in Chemistry, 2003
“My first experience with glycoproteins was the research for my thesis (1957) on the effects of proteins on the physical characteristics of the long-chain sugar hyaluronic acid. In 1990 I began an association with the Glycobiology Institute of Oxford University, a pioneer glycobiology laboratory where the term glycobiology was introduced by its Director, Raymond Dwek. We initiated a program [that] led to the design of novel potential therapies—iminosugars—for HCV and potentially many other viruses that could have a profound effect on the prevention and treatment of viral disease.
Essentials of Glycobiology
is a major resource for understanding these posttranslational biochemical reactions that affect the function and fate of proteins produced by the genes that are profoundly changed by their added sugars.”
–
Baruch S. Blumberg
,
Nobel Laureate in Medicine, 1976
“Paul Valery, the French author, poet, and mathematician, once said: ‘
Ce qui est simple est faux, ce qui est compliqué est incomprehensible
‘ (that which is simple is wrong, that which is complicated is incomprehensible). Well, yes, but not this time. The second edition of
Essentials of Glycobiology
, superbly printed and illustrated, develops in simple and absolutely precise terms the complicated intricacies of glycobiology. I would have killed to get this encyclopedic treatise 40 years ago when I was working my way through this field.”
–
Edmond H. Fischer
,
Nobel Laureate in Medicine, 1992
THIRD EDITION
“The field of glycobiology has matured. The comments of Nobel Laureates on the previous editions reflect the long-held belief that central functional roles played by the diversity of glycan chains would be revealed by research in this field. Now, as the result of advances in analytical chemistry and much deeper understanding of genomes, cell and tissue organization, this field has arrived. The third edition of
Essentials of Glycobiology
stands as the authoritative treatise on the subject, covering all aspects of the field and written by the world leaders in current research.”
–
James E. Rothman
,
Nobel Laureate in Medicine, 2013
“Difficult to analyze and synthesize artificially, glycans are often simply ignored. To do so is to avert one's gaze from an important part of life. More than mere decoration, glycans magnify the diversity of the already diverse molecules to which they are attached, affect protein folding and stability, direct traffic within cells, serve as signposts of self vs. non-self, create barriers that protect us, and conversely, defend microbes, making some of them the pathogens they are. It is hard to imagine a world without complex sugars, but if such a world existed, it would be much diminished. The third edition of
Essentials of Glycobiology
may be life changing for scientists who have not yet engaged with glycobiology and will certainly be a treasured resource for those who already have.”
–
Bruce Beutler
,
Nobel Laureate in Medicine, 2011
“The
importance of glycans has long been recognized and great advances have been reported on the synthesis and chemical analysis of this class of natural compounds. In my field, structural biology, carbohydrate moieties in glycoproteins and in complex multi-component macromolecular systems have been and continue to be difficult to handle. I greatly welcome the effort made in this multiauthor volume to present results obtained with methods of structural biology in the context of the wealth of currently available chemical and biological data. I recommend the third edition of
Essentials of Glycobiology
as a highly useful reference on the current state of the field.”
–
Kurt Wüthrich
,
Nobel Laureate in Chemistry, 2002
“We think conventionally of the immune system as having evolved to deal with invading pathogens that express “foreign” proteins (and peptides), targeted via specific recognition units, particularly secreted antibodies and cell-bound T lymphocyte receptors. As the molecular revolution has unfolded, such science that relies on a reasonably direct correlation between genotype and phenotype has been relatively straightforward. Much more difficult to assess is the part played by glycosylation profiles in immune recognition and pathogen elimination. Perhaps even more intriguing is the issue of glycan abnormalities and recognition in cancer and many other disease processes. Now, in a third edition of
Essentials of Glycobiology
written by authoritative leaders in the field, we learn how this knowledge has been rapidly advancing, and see possibilities for real breakthroughs in understanding and therapy.”
–
Peter C. Doherty
,
Nobel Laureate in Chemistry, 1996

Essentials of Glycobiology, Fourth Edition
Contributors
EXECUTIVE EDITOR
Ajit Varki,
Distinguished Professor of Medicine and of Cellular & Molecular Medicine, Founding Director, Glycobiology Research and Training Center, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA
EDITORS
Richard D. Cummings
, Professor of Surgery, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Director, National Center for Functional Glycomics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
Jeffrey D. Esko
, Distinguished Professor of Cellular & Molecular Medicine, Founding Director, Glycobiology Research and Training Center, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA
Pamela Stanley
, Horace W. Goldsmith Foundation Chair, Professor of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA
Gerald W. Hart
, Sr. Eminent Scholar in Drug Discovery, Georgia Research Alliance William Henry Terry Professor of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA
Markus Aebi
, Professor of Mycology, ETH Zürich, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Biology, Zürich, Switzerland
Debra Mohnen
, Distinguished Research Professor, Georgia Athletics Association Professor in Complex Carbohydrate Research, Professor of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA
Taroh Kinoshita
, Endowed Chair and Professor, Yabumoto Department of Intractable Disease Research, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan
Nicolle H. Packer
, Distinguished Professor of Molecular Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia and Principal Research Leader, Institute for Glycomics, Griffith University, Gold Coast, Australia
James H. Prestegard
, Professor and Eminent Scholar Emeritus, Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA
Ronald L. Schnaar
, Professor, Departments of Pharmacology and Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA
Peter H. Seeberger
, Director of Max-Planck-Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, Potsdam, Germany, Professor, Freie Universität, Berlin, Germany
CO-AUTHORS
Yoshihiro Akimoto
, Professor, Kyorin University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan
Sonja-Verena Albers
, Professor, University of Freiburg, Freiberg im Breisgau, Germany
Takashi Angata
, Associate Research Fellow, Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
Jesús Angulo
, Sr. Distinguished Researcher, University of Seville, Seville, Spain
Kiyoko F. Aoki-Kinoshita
, Professor, Glycan and Life Systems Integration Center, Soka University, Tokyo, Japan
Susan L. Bellis
, Professor and Endowed Chair, University of Alabama, Birmingham, Alabama, USA
Carolyn R. Bertozzi
, Professor, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA
Michael Boyce
, Associate Professor, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA
Thomas Braulke
, Professor, University Medical-Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany
Inka Brockhausen
, Associate Professor, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada
Matthew P. Campbell
, Research Fellow, Institute for Glycomics, Griffith University, Queensland, Australia
Xi Chen
, Professor, University of California, Davis, Davis, California, USA
Elise Chiffoleau
, Researcher, French National Institute of Health and Medical Research, University of Nantes, Nantes, France
Henrik Clausen
, Professor, Copenhagen Center for Glycomics, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark
Karen J. Colley
, Professor and Dean, University of Illinois Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA
John Couchman
, Professor Emeritus, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark
Nancy Dahms
, Professor, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, USA
Alan G. Darvill
, Director and Regents Professor, Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA
Benjamin G. Davis
, Professor and Science Director, The Rosalind Franklin Institute and University of Oxford, Oxford, England
Martina Delbianco,
Group Leader, Max-Planck-Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, Potsdam, Germany
Matthew P. DeLisa
, Professor, Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA
Anne Dell
, Professor and Department Head Life Sciences, Imperial College, London, London, England
Tamara L. Doering
, Professor, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA
Kurt Drickamer
, Professor, Imperial College London, London, England
Jerry Eichler
, Professor, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel
Marilynn E. Etzler
, Professor, University of California, Davis, Davis, California, USA
Michael A.J. Ferguson
, Regius Professor, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, Scotland
Darón I. Freedberg
, Senior Scientist, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, Maryland, USA
Hudson H. Freeze
, Professor, Sanford Burnham Prebys, San Diego, California, USA
Morihisa Fujita
, Professor, Jiangnan University, Wuxi, Jiangsu, China
Pascal Gagneux
, Professor, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA
Kamil Godula
, Associate Professor and Associate Director, Glycobiology Research and Training Center, University of San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA
Michael G. Hahn
, Professor, Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA
Robert S. Haltiwanger
, GRA Eminent Scholar, Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA
Vincent Hascall
, Professor, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, USA
Stuart M. Haslam
, Professor, Imperial College London, London, England
Thierry Hennet
, Professor, Institute of Physiology, University of Zurich, Switzerland, Zurich, Switzerland
Bernard Henrissat
, Professor, Technical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Karin M. Hoffmeister
, Professor, Endowed Chair and Director, Versiti Translational Glycomics Center and Blood Research Institute, Wauwatosa, Wisconsin, USA
Cornelis H. Hokke
, Professor, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands
Anne Imberty
, Research Director, CERMAV, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Grenoble, France
Hamed Jafar-Nejad
, Professor, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA
Reiji Kannagi
, Distinguished Research Fellow, Institute of Biomedical Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
Niclas G. Karlsson
, Professor, Oslo Metropolitan University, Oslo, Norway
Koichi Kato
, Professor, Exploratory Research Center, National Institutes of Natural Sciences, Okazaki, Japan
Kay-Hooi Khoo
, Distinguished Research Fellow, Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
Jennifer J. Kohler
, Associate Professor, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA
Sneha Sudha Komath
, Professor, Jawaharlal Nehru University School of Life Sciences, New Delhi, India
Stuart Kornfeld
, Professor, Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, USA
Gordan Lauc
, Professor, University of Zagreb, Croatia
Carlito B. Lebrilla
, Distinguished Professor, University of California, Davis, Davis, California, USA
Dirk J. Lefeber
, Professor, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands
Nathan E. Lewis,
Associate Professor, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA
Amanda L. Lewis
, Professor and Associate Director, Glycobiology Research and Training Center, University of San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA
Ulf Lindahl
, Professor Emeritus, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
Robert J. Linhardt
, Chair, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York, USA
Frédérique Lisacek
, Group Leader, Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
Fu-Tong Liu
, Vice President, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
Jian Liu
, Professor, Eshelman School of Pharmacy University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA
Todd L. Lowary
, Distinguished Research Fellow, Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
Lara K. Mahal
, Professor, Canada Excellence Research Chair, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
Rodger P. McEver
, Vice President of Research, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA
Catherine L.R. Merry
, Professor of Stem Cell Glycobiology, Nottingham University, Nottingham, England
Benjamin H. Meyer
, Molecular Enzyme Technology and Biochemistry, University of Duisburg-Essen, Germany
Antonio Molina
, Professor and Director, Centre for Plant Biotechnology and Genomics, Technical University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain
Robert J. Moon
, Materials Research Engineer, USDA-Forest Service-Forest Products Laboratory, Madison, Wisconsin, USA
Kelley W. Moremen
, Professor, Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA
Jenny C. Mortimer
, Associate Professor, University of Adelaide, Glen Osmond, South Australia, Australia
Barbara Mulloy
, Visiting Professor, Glycosciences Laboratory, Imperial College London, London, England
Hiroshi Nakato
, Professor, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA
Sriram Neelamegham
, Professor, State University of New York, Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, USA
Malcolm A. O'Neill
, Associate Research Scientist, Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA
Tetsuya Okajima
, Professor, School of Medicine, Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan
Hermen S. Overkleeft
, Professor, Leiden University, Leiden, Netherlands
Yasuhiro Ozeki
, Professor, School of Sciences, Yokohama City University, Yokohama, Japan
Vladislav Panin
, Professor, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA
Armando Parodi
, Professor, Fundación Instituto Leloir, Buenos Aires, Argentina
Katharina Paschinger
, FWF Fellow, Institute of Biochemistry, University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Vienna, Austria
Markus Pauly
, Professor, Heinrich-Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany
Serge Perez
, Research Director Emeritus, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Grenoble, France
J. Michael Pierce
, Distinguished Research Professor and Mudter Professor of Cancer Research, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA
Gabriel A. Rabinovich
, Professor, Institute of Biology and Experimental Medicine, National Scientific and Research Council, University of Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina
T.N.C. Ramya
, Principal Scientist, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, Institute of Microbial Technology, Chandigarh, India
Celso A. Reis,
Professor, i3S Institute for Research and Innovation in Health, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal
James M. Rini
, Professor, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Françoise H. Routier
, Professor, Hannover Medical School, Institute for Clinical Biochemistry, Hannover, Germany
Pauline M. Rudd,
Visiting Investigator, Bioprocessing Technology Institute A*Star, Singapore and Adjunct Professor, University College, Dublin, Ireland
Robert Sackstein
, Senior Vice-President for Health Affairs and Dean, College of Medicine, Florida International University, Miami, Florida, USA
Roger Sandhoff
, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany
Liliana Schaefer
, Professor, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany
Melanie A. Simpson
, Professor and Department Head, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA
Chad Slawson
, Associate Professor, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas, USA
Richard Steet
, Director of Research, Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, South Carolina, USA
Sean R. Stowell
, Associate Professor, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
Avadhesha Surolia
, Professor, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India
Tadashi Suzuki
, Chief Scientist, Riken Cluster for Pioneering Research, Wako, Japan
Christine M. Szymanski
, Professor, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA
Naoyuki Taniguchi,
Director of Research Center, Osaka International Cancer Institute, and Professor Emeritus Osaka University, Osaka, Japan
Maureen E. Taylor
, Reader, Imperial College London, London, England
Kelly G. Ten Hagen
, Senior Investigator and Chief, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA
Nicolas Terrapon
, Associate Professor, Aix-Marseille University, Marseille, France
Morten Thaysen-Andersen
, Associate Professor, ARC Future Fellow, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia
Michael Tiemeyer
, Professor, Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA
Breeanna Urbanowicz
, Assistant Professor, Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA
Yvette van Kooyk
, Professor, Amsterdam University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands
Gerardo R. Vasta
, Professor, Institute of Marine and Environmental Technology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA
David J. Vocadlo
, Professor, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada
Stephan von Gunten
, Professor, Institute of Pharmacology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland
Hans H. Wandall
, Professor, Copenhagen Center for Glycomics, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark
Lance Wells
, Professor, Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA
Christopher M. West
, Professor and Department Head, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA
Chris Whitfield
, Professor, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada
Göran Widmalm
, Professor, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden
Iain B.H. Wilson
, Associate Professor, University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Wien, Austria
Robert J. Woods
, Professor, Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA
Manfred Wuhrer
, Professor, Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, Leiden University, Leiden, Netherlands
Ding Xu
, Associate Professor, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, USA
William S. York
, Emeritus Professor, Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA
Natasha E. Zachara
, Associate Professor, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA
Jochen Zimmer
, Professor, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA

Essentials of Glycobiology, Fourth Edition
Editors of Earlier Editions
The current Consortium of Glycobiology Editors thank the following colleagues for their major contributions as editors of earlier editions of this book:
Carolyn R. Bertozzi,
Anne T. and Robert M. Bass Professor of Chemistry, Professor, Chemical and Systems Biology and Radiation, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA
Alan G. Darvill,
Director and Regents Professor, Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, GRA Senior Fellow, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA
Marilynn E. Etzler,
Professor Emerita of Biochemistry, University of California, Davis, Davis, California, USA
Hudson H. Freeze,
Director, Human Genetics Program, Director, Sanford Children's Health Research Center, La Jolla, California, USA
Jamey Marth,
Director and Professor, Immunity and Pathogenesis Program, Sanford Burnham Prebys, La Jolla, California, USA

Essentials of Glycobiology, Fourth Edition
Consultant Reviewers
The Editors would like to thank the following reviewers for their valuable help:
Anabel Gonzalez-Gil,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, USA
Laura Bacete,
Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Norway
Felix Broecker,
Idorsia Pharmaceuticals Ltd., Germany
Dillon Chen,
University of California, San Diego School of Medicine, USA
Jennifer Groves,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, USA
Graham Heberlig,
University of California, San Diego School of Medicine, USA
So-Young Kim,
University of California, San Diego School of Medicine, USA
Junko Matsuda,
Kawasaki Medical School, Japan
Satyajit Mayor,
National Center for Biological Sciences, India
Bobby Ng,
Sanford Burnham Prebys, USA
Kyriakos Papanicolaou,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, USA
Ryan Porell,
University of California, San Diego School of Medicine, USA
Ruth Siew,
University of California, San Diego School of Medicine, USA
Priya Umapathi,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, USA
Yan Wang,
Cleveland Clinic Lerner Research Institute, USA
The Editors and Co-Authors gratefully acknowledge the efforts of Richard D. Cummings in helping to coordinate and prepare the hundreds of illustrations in this book.

Essentials of Glycobiology, Fourth Edition
Classic Books and Monographs
Previous editions of this book featured a list of books and monograph resources. Given current day Internet searching and frequent review articles, such a listing is no longer as critical. But certain classic books and monographs still have much value for those who want to explore the history of the field. Accordingly, we have retained the following list from the 20th century.
–
The Editors
Gottschalk A, ed. 1960.
The chemistry and biology of sialic acids and related substances.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Stacey M, Barker SA. 1960.
Polysaccharides of micro-organisms
. Oxford University Press, London.
Ginsburg V, Neufeld E, eds. 1966. Complex carbohydrates, part A.
Methods in enzymology
, Vol. 8. Academic, San Diego.
Whistler R, ed. 1968-80.
Methods in carbohydrate chemistry
, Vols. I-VIII. Academic, San Diego.
Hunt S. 1970.
Polysaccharide-protein complexes in invertebrates
. Academic, London.
Ginsburg V, ed. 1972. Complex carbohydrates, part B.
Methods in enzymology
, Vol. 28. Academic, San Diego.
Gottschalk A, ed. 1972.
Glycoproteins: their composition, structure and function.
Elsevier, New York.
Rosenberg A, Schengrund C-L., eds. 1976.
Biological roles of sialic acids
. Plenum, New York.
Ginsburg V, ed. 1978. Complex carbohydrates, part C
. Methods in enzymology
, Vol. 50. Academic, San Diego.
Sweeley CC, ed. 1979.
Cell surface glycolipids
. American Chemical Society, Washington, DC.
Lennarz WJ, ed. 1980.
The biochemistry of glycoproteins and proteoglycans
. Plenum, New York.
Ginsburg V, Robbins P, eds. 1981.
Biology of carbohydrates
, Vol. 1. Wiley, New York.
Ginsburg V, ed. 1982. Complex carbohydrates, part D.
Methods in enzymology,
Vol. 83. Academic, San Diego.
Horowitz M, Pigman W, eds. 1982.
The glycoconjugates
. Academic, New York.
Schauer R, ed. 1982.
Sialic acids, chemistry, metabolism, and function
. Springer-Verlag, New York.
Ginsburg V, Robbins P, eds. 1984.
Biology of carbohydrates
, Vol. 2. Wiley, New York.
Ivatt RJ, ed. 1984.
The biology of glycoproteins
. Plenum, New York.
Beeley JG, ed. 1985.
Glycoprotein and proteoglycan techniques
. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Evered D, Whelan J, eds. 1986.
Functions of the proteoglycans
. Ciba Foundation Symposium. Wiley, Chichester, UK.
Liener IE, Sharon N, Goldstein IJ, eds. 1986.
The lectins: properties, functions, and applications in biology and medicine
. Academic, Orlando, FL.
Chaplin MF, Kennedy JF, eds. 1987.
Carbohydrate analysis: a practical approach.
IRL Press, Oxford.
Ginsburg V, ed. 1987. Complex carbohydrates, part E.
Methods in enzymology
, Vol. 138. Academic, San Diego.
Wight TN, Mecham RP. 1987.
Biology of proteoglycans
. Academic, London.
Evered D, Whelan J. 1988.
The biology of hyaluronan
. Ciba Foundation Symposium. Wiley, Chichester, UK.
Evered D, Whelan J, eds. 1989.
The biology of hyaluronan
. Ciba Foundation Symposium, Vol. 143. Wiley, New York.
Feizi T. 1989.
Carbohydrate recognition in cellular function
. Ciba Foundation Symposium, Vol. 145. Wiley, New York.
Ginsburg V, ed. 1989. Complex carbohydrates, part F. In
Methods in enzymology
, Vol. 179. Academic, San Diego.
Greiling H, Scott JE, eds. 1989.
Keratan sulphate: chemistry, biology, chemical pathology
. The Biochemical Society, London.
Margolis RU, Margolis RK, eds. 1989.
Neurobiology of glycoconjugates
. Plenum, New York.
Lane DG, Lindahl U, eds. 1990.
Heparin: chemical and biological properties.
CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
Ginsburg V, Robbins P, eds. 1991.
Biology of carbohydrates,
Vol. 3. Wiley, New York.
Allen HJ, Kisailus EC, eds. 1992.
Glycoconjugates: composition, structure, and function
. Marcel Dekker, New York.
Fukuda M, ed. 1992.
Cell surface carbohydrates and cell development
. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
Fukuda M, ed. 1992.
Glycobiology: a practical approach
. IRL Press, Oxford.
Roth J, Rutishauser U, Troy F, eds. 1992.
Polysialic acids
. Birkhauser Verlag, Basel, Switzerland.
Roberts DD, Mecham RP, eds. 1993.
Cell surface and extracellular glycoconjugates: structure and function
. Academic, San Diego.
Varki A, Guest Ed. 1993. Analysis of glycoconjugates. In
Current protocols in molecular biology
(ed. Ausubel F, et al.), Chap. 17. Green Publishing/Wiley Interscience, New York.
Bock K, Clausen H, eds. 1994.
Complex carbohydrates in drug research: structural and functional aspects
. Munksgaard, Copenhagen.
Fukuda M, Hindsgaul O, eds. 1994.
Molecular glycobiology
. Oxford University Press, New York.
Lee YC, Lee RT. 1994. Neoglycoconjugates, part B. Biomedical applications. In
Methods in enzymology
, Vol. 247. Academic, London.
Lennarz WJ, Hart GW, eds. 1994. Guide to techniques in glycobiology. In
Methods in enzymology,
Vol. 230. Academic, San Diego.
Alavi A, Axford JS. 1995.
Advances in experimental medicine and biology
, Vol. 376,
Glycoimmunology
. Plenum, New York.
Montreuil J, Vliegenthart JFG, Schachter H, eds. 1995.
Glycoproteins
. Elsevier, New York.
Rosenberg A, ed. 1995.
Biology of the sialic acids
. Plenum, New York.
Verbert A, ed. 1995.
Methods on glycoconjugates: a laboratory manual.
Harwood Academic, Chur, Switzerland.
Montreuil J, Vliegenthart JFG, Schachter H, eds. 1996.
Glycoproteins and disease
. Elsevier, New York.
Brockhausen I, Kuhns W. 1997.
Glycoproteins and human disease
. R.G. Landes, Austin, TX.
Gabius HJ, Gabius S, eds. 1997.
Glycosciences: status and perspectives
. Chapman and Hall, New York.
Montreuil J, Vliegenthart JFG, Schachter H, eds. 1997.
Glycoproteins II.
Elsevier, New York.
Townsend RR, Hotchkiss AT, eds. 1997.
Techniques in glycobiology
. Marcel Dekker, New York.
Conrad HE, ed. 1998.
Heparin-binding proteins
. Academic, San Diego.
Hounsell EF, ed. 1998.
Methods in molecular biology
, Vol. 76,
Glycoanalysis protocols
. Humana, Totowa, NJ.
Laurent TC. 1998.
The chemistry, biology and medical applications of hyaluronan and its derivatives
. Portland Press, London.
Varki A, Esko J, Cummings R, Freeze HH, Hart GW, Marth J, eds. 1999.
Essentials of glycobiology
. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY.

Essentials of Glycobiology, Fourth Edition
Abbreviations
2-AA
2-aminobenzoic acid
AA
amino acid
AAL
Aleuria aurantia
lectin
2-AB
2-aminobenzamide
ABC
ATP-binding cassette
ACE
affinity co-electrophoresis OR angiotensin-converting enzyme
ACG-IB
achrondrogenesis type IB
AchE
acetylcholinesterase
AD
Alzheimer's disease
ADAMTS
a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs
ADCC
antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity
ADPKD
autosomal-dominant polycystic kidney disease
AEP
aminoethylphosphonate
AFM
atomic force microscopy
AG
arabinogalactan
AGA
automated glycan assembly
AGEs
advanced glycation end products
AGP
arabinogalactan protein
AGX
arabinoglucuronoxylan
AH
actinohivin
AHM
anhydromannitol
ALG
Asn-linked glycosylation
α-DG
α-dystroglycan
ALS
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
AMR
Ashwell–Morell receptor
ANTS
8-aminonaphthalene-1,3,6-trisulfonic acid
AOII
atelosteogenesis type II
AOX
alcohol oxidase
APAP
arabinoxylan pectin arabinogalactan protein
APC
antigen-presenting cell
Api
apiose
API
application programming interface
APLP
amyloid precursor–like protein
APTS
1-aminopyrene-3,6,8-trisulfonic acid
ASGPR
asialoglycoprotein receptor
AST
arylsulfotransferase
AuNP
gold nanoparticle
AVM
arteriovenous malformation
BCR
B-cell receptor
BCSDB
Bacterial Carbohydrate Structure Database
βCD
β-cyclodextrin
BMP
bone morphogenetic protein OR bis(monoacylglycero)phosphate
BoNT
Botulinum neurotoxin
BSA
bovine serum albumin
CAD
collision-activated dissociation
CASPER
Computer Assisted Spectrum Evaluation of Regular Polysaccharides [program]
CAZy
Carbohydrate-Active Enzymes [database]
CBM
carbohydrate-binding molecule
CCP
complement control protein
CCSD
Complex Carbohydrate Structure Database [aka CarbBank database]
CD
cluster of differentiation
CDG-II
congenital disorders of glycosylation type II
CD-MPR
cation-dependent mannose 6-phosphate receptor
CE
capillary electrophoresis
CEBiP
chitin oligosaccharide elicitor-binding protein
CER
ceramide
CESA
cellulose synthase
CFG
Consortium for Functional Glycomics
CFTR
cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator
CGD
congenital disorders of glycosylation
CHIME
coloboma, heart defects, ichthyosiform dermatitis, mental retardation, and ear anomalies with hearing loss [syndrome]
CHO
Chinese hamster ovary
CID
collision-induced dissociation
CI-MPR
cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor
CK
creatine kinase
CM
cytoplasmic membrane
CMAH
CMP–Neu5Ac hydroxylase
CMD
congenital muscular dystrophy
CMP
cytidine monophosphate
CMS
congenital myasthemic syndrome
CMV
cytomegalovirus
CN
cellulose nanomaterial
CNS
central nervous system
CNT
carbon nanotube
CNTFR
ciliary neurotrophic factor receptor
CNX
calnexin
COG
conserved oligomeric Golgi
ConA
concanavalin A
COPD
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
COPI
coat protein I
COSY
coupling correlated spectroscopy
COVID-19
coronavirus disease 2019
CPS
capsular polysaccharide
CRD
carbohydrate-recognition domain OR cross-reacting determinant
CREB
cAMP response element binding
CREG
cellular repressor of E1A-stimulated genes
CRISPR
clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats
CRP
C-reactive protein
crRNA
CRISPR-targeting guide RNA
CRT
calreticulin
cryo-EM
cryo-electron microscopy
CS
chondroitin sulfate OR circumsporozoite
CsA
contact site A
CSDB
Carbohydrate Structure Database
CSL
CBF1/Su(H)/Lag-1
CT
cholera toxin
CTD
carboxy-terminal domain
CTL
C-type lectin
CTLD
C-type lectin domain
CTLF
C-type lectin fold
DAF
decay accelerating factor
DAG
diacylglycerol
DAMP
damage-associated molecular pattern
DANA
2-deoxy-2,3-di-dehydro-
N
-acetylneuraminic acid
DAP
DNAX activation protein
DBL
Dolichos biflorus
lectin
DC
dendritic cell
DCAL
dendritic cell–associated lectin
DC-SIGN
dendritic cell–specific intercellular adhesion molecule-3-grabbing nonintegrin
DDD2
Dowling–Degos disease type 2
DEEP-STD
differential epitope mapping saturation transfer difference
DFT
density functional theory
DGDG
1,2-diacyl-3-O-(α-D-Gal-(1,6)-O-β-Gal)-sn-glycerol OR digalactosyldiacylglycerol
DIC
disseminated intravascular coagulation
DLL
Delta-like ligand
DMAP
DNA methylase-associated protein
DMB
1,2-diamino-4,5-methylenedioxybenzene
Dol-P
dolichol phosphate
Dol-PP
dolichol pyrophosphate
DON
deoxynorleucine OR 6-diazo-5-oxo-L-norleucine
dp
degree of polymerization
D-PDMP
D-threo-1-phenyl-2-decanoylamino-3-morpholino-1-propanol
Dpp
Decapentaplegic
DS
dermatan sulfate
DSA
Datura stramonium
agglutinin
DspB
dispersin B
DTD
diastrophic dystrophy
eAChE
erythrocyte acetylcholinesterase
EAE
experimental allergic encephalomyelitis
EBA
erythrocyte-binding antigen
EBI
European Bioinformatics Institute
EBL
erythrocyte-binding-like
EBR1
egg binding receptor 1
EBV
Epstein–Barr virus
EC
Enzyme Commission
ECD
electron capture dissociation
ECM
extracellular matrix
EcorL
Erythrina corallodendron
lectin
EDEM
ER degradation-enhancing α-mannosidase I–like protein
EET
enzyme enhancement therapy
EGF
epidermal growth factor
EGT
ecdysteroid glucosyltransferase
EI
electron impact
eIF2
eukaryotic initiation factor 2
EIS
electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
Elf-1
E74-like factor 1
ELISA
enzyme-linked immunoabsorbent assay
EMT
epithelial–mesenchymal transition
ENDO F2
endoglycosidase F2
ENDO H
endoglycosidase H
eNOS
endothelial nitric oxide synthase
EOGT
EGF-specific O-GlcNAc transferase
EPEC
enteropathogenic
E. coli
EPG
endopolygalacturonase
E-PHA
erythroagglutining phytohemagglutinin from
Phaseolus vulgaris
EPO
erythropoietin
EPS
exopolysaccharide OR extracellular polysaccharide
ER
endoplasmic reticulum
ERAD
endoplasmic reticulum–associated degradation
ERGIC
ER–Golgi intermediate compartment
ERK
extracellular mitogen-regulated protein kinase
ERT
enzyme replacement therapy
ESI
electrospray ionization
ETD
electron transfer dissociation
EtNP
ethanolamine phosphate
EUL
rice
Euonymus
-related lectin
FAB
fast atom bombardment
FACE
fluorophore-assisted carbohydrate electrophoresis
FAK
focal adhesion kinase
FCMD
Fukuyama congenital muscular dystrophy
f-CNT
functionalized carbon nanotube
FDA
Food and Drug Administration
FET
field-effect transistor
FGE
formylglycine-generating enzyme
FGF
fibroblast growth factor
FGFR
fibroblast growth factor receptor
FHA
filamentous hemagglutinin
FKRP
fukutin-related protein
FKTN
fukutin
FRC
fibroblastic reticular cell
FSH
follicle-stimulating hormone
FSP
fucose sulfate polymer
FT
Fourier transform OR fucosyl- transferase
GABA
γ-aminobutyric acid
GAG
glycosaminoglycan
Gal
galactose
GALE
uridine diphosphate galactose-4-epimerase
GALK
galactokinase
GALNT
polypeptide GalNAc-transferase
GALT
galactose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase
GalT
galactosyltransferase
GARP
glutamic acid/alanine-rich protein
GAS
Group A streptococcus
GBP
glycan-binding protein
GBS
Group B streptococcus OR Guillain–Barré syndrome
GC
gas chromatography
GCS
glycosylceramide synthase
GDNFR-α
glial-cell-[line-]derived neurotrophic factor receptor-α
GFAT
glucosamine:fructose aminotransferase
GFP
green fluorescent protein
GH
glycoside hydrolase [aka glycosidase]
GIPL
glycoinositol phospholipid
Glc
glucose
GlcA
glucuronic acid
GlcNAc
N-acetylglucosamine
GLIC
Glycome Informatics Consortium
GlycO
Glycomics Ontology
GNA
Galanthus nivalis
agglutinin
GNE
N-acetylglucosamine-2-epimerase/N-acetylmannosamine kinase
GPCR
G protein–coupled receptor
GPI
glycosylphosphatidylinositol
GPI-AP
GPI-anchored protein
GPP
Glycan Pathway Predictor
GRIFIN
galectin-related interfiber protein
GRP
glycan-recognizing probe OR galectin-related protein OR glycan-recognizing protein
GS
glycogen synthase
GSC
germline stem cell
GSK3β
glycogen synthase kinase-3β
GSL
glycosphingolipid
GT
glycosyltransferase
GWAS
genome-wide association study
GXM
glucuronoxylomannan
GXMG
glucuronoxylomannogalactan
HA
hyaluronan OR hemagglutinin
HAPLN
hyaluronan and proteoglycan link protein
HAS
hyaluronan synthase
HAT
histone acetyltransferase
HBHA
heparin-binding hemagglutinin adhesin
HBP
hexosamine biosynthetic pathway
HCD
high-energy collision dissociation
HCELL
hematopoietic cell E-/L-selectin ligand
HDL
high-density lipoprotein
HDX
hydrogen deuterium exchange
HEMPAS
hereditary erythroblastic multinuclearity with positive acidified-serum test
HEV
high endothelial venule
HF
hydrogen fluoride
HG
homogalacturonan
HGF
hepatocyte growth factor
Hh
Hedgehog
HIBM-II
hereditary inclusion body myopathy type II
HIF
hypoxia-inducible factor
HILIC
hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography
Hint-1
human intelectin 1
HIT
heparin-induced thrombocytopenia
HIV
human immunodeficiency virus
HMBC
heteronuclear multiple-bond correlation
HME
hereditary multiple exocytosis
HMG
high mobility group
HMM
hidden Markov model
HMO
human milk oligosaccharide
HPA
Helix pomatia
agglutinin
HPAEC
high-pH anion-exchange chromatography
HPCE
high-performance capillary electrophoresis
HPLC
high-performance liquid chromatography
HPMRS
hyperphosphatasia with mental retardation syndrome
HRGP
hydroxyproline-rich glycoprotein
HRP
horseradish peroxidase
HS
heparan sulfate
HSCT
hematopoietic stem cell therapy
HSQC
heteronuclear single quantum coherence
HSV
herpes simplex virus
HUPO-PSI
Human Proteome Organization-Proteomics Standards Initiative
Hyp
hydroxyproline
IC
intermediate compartment
ICAM
intercellular adhesion molecule
ID
intellectual disability
IDGF
imaginal disc growth factor
IdoA
iduronic acid
IEF
isoelectric focusing
IFN-γ
interferon-γ
IGD
inherited GPI deficiency
IGSF
immunoglobulin superfamily
IL-1
Interleukin-1
IR
insulin receptor OR infrared
IRS
insulin receptor substrate
ITAM
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activatory motif
ITC
isothermal titration calorimetry
ITI
inter-α-trypsin inhibitor
ITIM
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motif
ITP
idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
IUBMB
International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
IUPAC
International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry
JAG
Jagged
JCGGDB
Japan Consortium for Glycobiology and Glycotechnology Database
KCF
KEGG Chemical Function
KDN
2-keto-3-deoxy-D-glycero-D-galactonononic acid
KEGG
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomics
KIR
killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptor
KLH
keyhole limpet hemocyanin
KO
KEGG Orthology [database]
KS
keratan sulfate
LAA
Laburnum alpinum
agglutinin
LAD
leukocyte adhesion deficiency
LAM
lipoarabinomannan
LAR
leukocyte common antigen-related protein
LC
liquid chromatography
LCA
Lens culinaris
agglutinin
LDL
low-density lipoprotein
LDN
LacdiNAc
LDNF
fucosylated LacdiNAc
LecRK
L-type lectin receptor kinase
LERP
lysosomal enzyme receptor protein
Le
x
Lewis x
Lev
levulinoyl
LFNG
Lunatic fringe
LIF
leukemia inhibitory factor OR laser-induced fluorescence
LLO
lipid-linked oligosaccharide
LM
lipomannan
LMW
low-molecular-weight
LNP
lectin nucleotide phosphohydrolase
LOS
lipooligosaccharide
LPG
lipophosphoglycan
L-PHA
L-phytohemagglutinin
LPPG
lipopeptidophosphoglycan
L-PROSY
looped, projected spectroscopy
LPS
lipopolysaccharide
LSC
leukemic stem cell
LSL
Lonchocarpus sericeus
agglutinin
LSPR
localized surface plasmon resonance
LTA
lipoteichoic acid OR
Lotus tetragonolobus
agglutinin
LysM
lysozyme motif
mAb
monoclonal antibody
MAG
myelin-associated glycoprotein
MAH
Maackia amurensis
hemagglutinin
MAL
Maackia amurensis
lectin
MALDI-MS
matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry
MALDI-TOF
matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time of flight
Man
mannose
MAP
mitogen-activated protein
MAPK
MAP kinase
MASP
MBL-associated serine protease
MBL
mannose-binding lectin
MBP
mannose-binding protein OR major basic protein
MCD
macular corneal dystrophy
MD
molecular dynamics
m
-DAP
meso
-diaminopimelic acid
MDCK
Madin–Darby canine kidney
MDL
myeloid DAP12-associating lectin
MDO
membrane-derived oligosaccharide
MDP
metallodipeptidase
MEB
muscle–eye–brain disease
MFNG
Manic fringe
MGDG
1,2-diacyl-3-O-(β-D-Gal)-sn-glycerol OR monogalactosyldiacylglycerol
MGL
macrophage galactose-binding lectin
MGUS
monoclonal gammopathy of unknown significance
MHC
major histocompatibility complex
MIAPE
Minimum Information for A Proteomics Experiment [initiative]
MICL
myeloid inhibitory CTL-like receptor
MINCLE
macrophage inducible Ca
++
-dependent lectin
MIP-1β
macrophage inflammatory protein-1β
MIRAGE
Minimum Information Required for A Glycomics Experiment [initiative]
MM
molecular mechanics
MMDB
Molecular Modeling Database
MN
membranous neuropathy
MND
motor neuron disease
MNP
magnetic nanoparticle
mOGT
mitochondrial OGT
MPL
monophosphoryl lipid A
MPR
M6P receptor
MPS
mucopolysaccharidosis
MR
mannose receptor
MRH
M6P receptor homology OR mannose receptor homologous
MRI
magnetic resonance imaging
mRNA
messenger RNA
MS
mass spectrometry
MSD
multiple sulfatase deficiency
MSP
merozoite surface protein
MTD
major tropism determinant
MTG
mind-the-gap [protein]
MTX
mosquitocidal toxin
4-MU
4-methylumbelliferone
MVB
multivesicular body
MWCNT
multiwalled carbon nanotube
MytiLec
Mytilus galloprovincialis
β-trefoil lectin
NAD
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
NADPH
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
NCAM
neural cell adhesion molecule
NCBI
National Center for Biotechnology Information
ncOGT
nucleocytoplasmic OGT
Neu
neuraminic acid
NF-κB
nuclear factor-κB
NHS
N
-hydroxysuccinimide
NIR
near-infrared
NK
natural killer
NKT
natural killer T
NLR
NOD-like receptor
NLS
nuclear localization sequence
NMJ
neuromuscular junction
NMR
nuclear magnetic resonance
NOD
nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain
NOE
nuclear Overhauser effect
NP
nanoparticle
NSID
nonsyndromic intellectual disability
NulO
nonulosonic acid
ODR-2
odorant response abnormal 2
OGA
O-GlcNAcase
OGT
O-GlcNAc transferase
OMIM
Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man
OPG
osmoregulated periplasmic glucan
O-PS
O-antigen polysaccharide
ORF
open reading frame
OST
oligosaccharyltransferase
OTase
oligosaccharyltransferase
PAD
pulsed amperometric detection
PAH
pulmonary arterial hypertension
PAI-1
plasminogen activator inhibitor-1
PAM
protospacer adjacent motif
PAMP
pathogen-associated molecular pattern
PAP
pulmonary arterial pressure
PAPS
3′-phosphoadenosine-5′-phosphosulfate
PAS
periodic acid–Schiff
PBP
penicillin-binding protein
PC
phosphorylcholine OR polycystin
PcG
Polycomb group
PCLP
podocalyxin-like protein
PCP
polysaccharide copolymerase
PCR
polymerase chain reaction
PCT
pharmacological chaperone therapy
PDB
Protein Data Bank
PDI
protein disulfide isomerase
PDK
phosphatidylinositol-dependent kinase
PDX1
pancreatic and duodenal homeobox 1
PE
phosphoethanolamine
PECAM
platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule
PEP
phosphoenolpyruvate
PG
phosphoglycan
PGC
porous graphitized carbon
PGIP
polygalacturonase-inhibiting proteins
PGM
phosphoglucomutase
PHAL
phytohemagglutinin L
PHF
paired helical filament
PI
phosphatidylinositol
PI3K
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
PILR
paired immunoglobulin-like receptor
PIM
phosphatidylinositol mannoside
PKC
protein kinase C
PLAP
placental alkaline phosphatase
PLC
phospholipase C
PLE
protein-losing enteropathy
PLM
phospholipomannan
PMAA
partially methylated alditol acetate
PMT
protein mannosyltransferase
PNA
peanut agglutinin
PNAG
poly-N-acetylglucosamine
PNGase F
peptide-N-glycosidase F
PNH
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
PNS
peripheral nervous system
POFUT
protein O-fucosyltransferase
POGLUT
protein O-glucosyltransferase
PPG
proteophosphoglycan
PrP
prion protein
PRR
pattern-recognition receptor
PS
phosphatidylserine
PsA
prespore antigen
PSA
Pisum sativum
agglutinin OR polysialic acid
PSGL
P-selectin glycoprotein ligand
PSL
Pisum sativum
lectin (pea lectin)
PSP
promastigote surface protease
PVD
pulmonary vascular resistance
QCM
quartz crystal microbalance
QD
quantum dot
QM
quantum mechanics
QTOF
quadrupole time of flight
RA
rheumatoid arthritis
RAGE
receptor for advanced glycation end products
RANKL
receptor activator of nuclear factor (NF)-κB ligand
Rb
retinoblastoma
RCA
Ricinus communis
agglutinin
RCL
reactive center loop
RDF
Resource Description Framework
rER
rough endoplasmic reticulum
RF
radio frequency
RFNG
Radical fringe
RG
rhamnogalacturonan
RHO
ras homolog
RI
refractive index
RINGS
Resource for Informatics of Glycomes at Soka
RIP
ribosome-inactivating protein
RME
receptor-mediated endocytosis
RNAi
RNA interference
RNA-seq
RNA sequencing
ROE
rotating-frame Overhauser effect
ROS
reactive oxygen species
RPTP
receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase
rRNA
ribosomal RNA
RRV
relative reactivity value
RU
repeating unit OR resonance unit
SAG
surface antigen
SAM
self-assembled monolayer
SAMP
self-associated molecular pattern
SAP
sphingolipid activator protein OR serum amyloid P
SAX
strong anion exchange chromatography
SAXS
small-angle X-ray scattering
SBA
soybean agglutinin
SCD
sickle cell disease
scFv
single-chain variable fragment
SDF-1
stromal cell–derived factor-1
SDS-PAGE
sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
SEC
size exclusion chromatography
SED
spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia
SeviL
Mytilisepta virgata
R-type lectin
SHP-1
Src homology region 2 domain–containing phosphatase-1
shRNA
short hairpin RNA
Sia
sialic acid
SiaT
sialyltransferase
SIB
Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics
Siglec
Sia-binding immunoglobulin-like lectin
siRNA
small interfering RNA
SLE
systemic lupus erythematosus
SLe
x
sialyl-Lewis x
SLRP
small leucine-rich proteoglycan
Sn
sialoadhesin
SNA
Sambucus nigra
agglutinin
SNFG
Symbol Nomenclature for Glycans
SNP
single-nucleotide polymorphism
sOGT
short OGT
SPA
single-particle analysis
SPR
surface plasmon resonance
SRT
substrate reduction therapy
SSA
Sambucus sieboldiana
lectin
SSEA
stage-specific embryonic antigen
ST
sialyltransferase
STAT5
signal transducer and activator of transcription 5
STD
saturation transfer difference
SVM
support vector machine
SWCNT
single-walled carbon nanotube
tACE
testis angiotensin-converting enzyme
TACE
TNF-α-converting enzyme
TAIR
The Arabidopsis Information Service
TALE
transcription activator–like effector
TALEN
transcription activator–like effector nuclease
TBS
tertbutyldimethylsilyl
TCGA
The Cancer Genome Atlas
TCR
T-cell receptor
T-DNA
transfer DNA
TEM
transmission electron microscopy
TET
ten-eleven translocation
TF
transcription factor
TGF-β
transforming growth factor β
TGN
trans
-Golgi network
Th1
T helper 1
TLC
thin-layer chromatography
TLR
Toll-like receptor
TM
transmembrane domain
TMT
tandem mass tag
TNALP
tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase
TNF-α
tumor necrosis factor-α
TOCSY
total correlation spectroscopy
TP
transpeptidase
TPA
tissue plasminogen activator
TPR
tetratricopeptide repeat
Treg
regulatory T cell
trNOE
transferred nuclear Overhauser effect
TS
trans
-sialidase
TSG
TNF-α-stimulated gene
TSP
thrombospondin
TSR
thrombospondin type-1 repeat
TS-TEM
ultrathin section transmission electron microscopy
UCH
ubiquitin carboxyhydrolase
UEA
Ulex europaeus
agglutinin
UGT or UGGT
UDP-glucose glycoprotein glucosyltransferase
UniLectin3D
a database covering the three-dimensional features of lectins
uPA(R)
urokinase-type plasminogen activator (receptor)
UTI
urinary tract infection
UV-Vis
ultraviolet-visible
VEGF
vascular endothelial growth factor
VIPL
VIP3b-like
VNTR
variable number tandem repeat
VSA
variant surface antigen
VSG
variant surface glycoprotein
VWF
von Willebrand factor
VZV
Varicella zoster virus
WAX
weak anion exchange
WFA
Wisteria floribunda
agglutinin
WGA
wheat germ agglutinin
WTA
wall teichoic acid
WWS
Walker–Warburg syndrome
XGA
xylogalacturonan
XLNSID
X-linked nonsyndromic intellectual disability
XPS
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
YY1
Yin Yang 1

Essentials of Glycobiology, Fourth Edition
1
Historical Background and Overview
Ajit Varki and Stuart Kornfeld
WHAT IS GLYCOBIOLOGY?
MONOSACCHARIDES ARE THE BASIC STRUCTURAL UNITS OF GLYCANS
GLYCANS CAN CONSTITUTE A MAJOR PORTION OF THE MASS OF A GLYCOCONJUGATE
MONOSACCHARIDES CAN BE LINKED TOGETHER IN MANY MORE WAYS THAN AMINO ACIDS OR NUCLEOTIDES
COMMON MONOSACCHARIDE UNITS OF GLYCOCONJUGATES
MAJOR CLASSES OF GLYCOCONJUGATES AND GLYCANS
GLYCAN STRUCTURES ARE NOT ENCODED DIRECTLY IN THE GENOME
SITE-SPECIFIC STRUCTURAL DIVERSITY IN PROTEIN GLYCOSYLATION
CELL BIOLOGY OF GLYCOSYLATION
TOOLS USED TO STUDY GLYCOSYLATION
GLYCOMICS
GLYCOSYLATION DEFECTS IN ORGANISMS AND CULTURED CELLS
BIOLOGICAL ROLES OF GLYCANS ARE DIVERSE
GLYCOSYLATION CHANGES IN DEVELOPMENT, DIFFERENTIATION, AND MALIGNANCY
EVOLUTIONARY CONSIDERATIONS IN GLYCOBIOLOGY
GLYCANS IN MEDICINE AND BIOTECHNOLOGY
GLYCANS IN NANOTECHNOLOGY, BIOENERGY, AND MATERIALS SCIENCE
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
FURTHER READING
T
his chapter provides a historical background to the field of glycobiology and an overview of this book. General terms found in the volume are considered, common monosaccharide units of glycoconjugates mentioned, and a uniform symbol nomenclature used for structural depictions presented. The major glycan classes discussed in the book are described, and an overview of the general pathways for their biosynthesis is provided. Topological issues relevant to biosynthesis and functions of glycoconjugates are also considered, and the growing role of these molecules in medicine, biotechnology, nanotechnology, bioenergy, and materials science is mentioned.
WHAT IS GLYCOBIOLOGY?
Defined in the broadest sense, glycobiology is the study of the structure, biosynthesis, biology, and evolution of saccharides (also called carbohydrates, sugar chains, or glycans) that are widely
distributed in nature and of the proteins that recognize them. How does glycobiology fit into the modern concepts of molecular biology? The central paradigm driving research in molecular biology has been that biological information flows from DNA to RNA to protein. The power of this concept lies in its template-based precision, the ability to manipulate one class of molecules based on knowledge of another, and the patterns of sequence homology and relatedness that predict function and reveal evolutionary relationships. With ongoing sequencing of numerous genomes, spectacular gains in understanding the biology of nucleic acids and proteins have occurred. Thus, many scientists assume that studying just these molecules will explain the makeup of cells, tissues, organs, physiological systems, and intact organisms. In fact, making a cell requires many small molecule metabolites as well as two other major classes of macromolecules—lipids and carbohydrates—which serve as intermediates in generating energy and as signaling effectors, recognition markers, and structural components. Taken together with the fact that they encompass some of the major posttranslational modifications of proteins, lipids, and carbohydrates help explain how the relatively small number of genes in the typical genome can generate the enormous biological complexities inherent in the development, growth, and functioning of diverse organisms.
The biological roles of carbohydrates are particularly prominent in the assembly of complex multicellular organs and organisms, which requires interactions between cells and the surrounding matrix. However, without any known exception, all cells and numerous macromolecules in nature carry an array of covalently attached sugars (monosaccharides) or sugar chains (oligosaccharides), which are generically referred to in this book as “glycans.” Sometimes glycans can also be freestanding entities. Being on the outer surface of cellular and secreted macromolecules, many glycans are in a position to modulate or mediate a variety of events in cell–cell, cell–matrix, and cell–molecule interactions critical to the development and function of a complex multicellular organism. They can also mediate interactions between organisms (e.g., between host and a parasite, pathogen, or a symbiont). In addition, simple, rapidly turning over, protein-bound glycans are abundant within the nucleus and cytoplasm, in which they can serve as regulatory switches. A more complete paradigm of molecular biology must therefore include glycans, often in covalent combination with other macromolecules (i.e., glycoconjugates, such as glycoproteins and glycolipids). In analogy to the current situation in Cosmology, glycans can be considered as the “dark matter” of the biological universe: a major and critical component that has yet to be fully incorporated into the “standard model” of biology. However, unlike the situation with dark matter in the Universe, there is already a lot known about glycans.
The chemistry and metabolism of carbohydrates were prominent matters of interest in the first part of the 20th century. Although engendering much attention, they were primarily considered as a source of energy or as structural materials, apparently lacking other biological activities. Furthermore, during the molecular biology revolution of the 1970s, studies of glycans lagged far behind those of other major classes of molecules. This was in part because of their inherent structural complexity, the difficulty in determining their sequences, and the fact that their biosynthesis could not be directly predicted from a DNA template. The development of many new technologies for exploring the structures and functions of glycans has since opened a new frontier of molecular biology called “glycobiology”—a word first coined in the late 1980s to recognize the coming together of the traditional disciplines of carbohydrate chemistry and biochemistry with a modern understanding of the cell and molecular biology of glycans and, in particular, their conjugates with proteins and lipids. Glycobiology is now one of the more rapidly growing fields in the natural sciences, with broad relevance to many areas of basic research, biomedicine, and biotechnology. The field includes the chemistry of carbohydrates, the enzymology of glycan formation and degradation, the recognition of glycans by specific proteins, roles of glycans in complex biological systems, and their analysis or manipulation by various techniques. Research in glycobiology thus requires a foundation not only in the nomenclature, biosynthesis, structure, chemical synthesis, and functions of glycans, but also in the general disciplines of molecular genetics, protein chemistry, cell biology, developmental biology, physiology, and medicine. This book provides an overview of the field, with relative emphasis on the glycans of animal systems. It is assumed that the reader has a basic background in advanced undergraduate-level chemistry, biochemistry, and cell biology. Some of the major investigators who influenced the early development of Glycobiology are shown in
Figure 1.1
, and more are listed in Online
Appendix 1A
. Many others have made major contributions as well, and a summary of the general principles gained from all this research is presented in
Table 1.1
.
FIGURE 1.1.
Nobel laureates in fields related to the history of glycobiology. Listed are the Laureates and their original Nobel citations: Hermann Emil Fischer (Chemistry, 1902),
“in recognition of the extraordinary services he has rendered by his work on sugar and purine syntheses”
; Eduard Buchner (Chemistry, 1907), “
for his discovery of cell-free fermentation
“; Otto Fritz Meyerhof (Physiology or Medicine, 1922), “
for his discovery of the fixed relationship between the consumption of oxygen and the metabolism of lactic acid in the muscle
“; Karl Landsteiner (Physiology or Medicine, 1930),
“for his discovery of human blood groups”
; Walter Norman Haworth (Chemistry, 1937),
“for his investigations on carbohydrates and vitamin C”
; Carl Ferdinand and Gerty Theresa Cori (Physiology or Medicine, 1947),
“for their discovery of the course of the catalytic conversion of glycogen”;
Luis F. Leloir (Chemistry, 1970),
“for his discovery of sugar nucleotides and their role in the biosynthesis of carbohydrates”
; George E. Palade (Physiology or Medicine, 1974),
“for discoveries concerning the structural and functional organization of the cell”;
and James E. Rothman and Randy W. Schekman (Physiology or Medicine 2013),
“for their discoveries of machinery regulating vesicle traffic, a major transport system in our cells.”
(C. Cori, G. Cori, L. Leloir, G. Palade, The Nobel Foundation/TT/Sipa USA; J. Rothman, R. Schekman, © Nobel Media AB. Photo: Alexander Mahmoud.)
TABLE 1.1.
General principles of glycobiology
Occurrence
All cells in nature are covered with a dense and complex array of sugar chains (glycans).
The cell walls of bacteria and Archaea are composed of several classes of glycans and glycoconjugates.
Most secreted proteins of eukaryotes carry large amounts of covalently attached glycans.
In eukaryotes, cell-surface and secreted glycans are mostly assembled via the ER–Golgi pathway.
The extracellular matrix, secretions, and body fluids of eukaryotes are also rich in glycans.
Cytosolic and nuclear glycans are common in eukaryotes.
For topological, evolutionary, and biophysical reasons, there are limited similarities between cell-surface/secreted and nuclear/cytosolic glycans.
Chemistry and structure
Glycosidic linkages can be in α- or β-linkage forms, which are biologically recognized as distinct.
Glycan chains can be linear or branched.
Glycans can be modified by a variety of different substituents, such as acetylation and sulfation.
Complete sequencing of glycans is feasible but usually requires combinatorial or iterative methods and attention to potential loss of labile substitutions.
Modern methods allow in vitro chemoenzymatic synthesis of both simple and complex glycans.
Biosynthesis
The primary units of glycans (monosaccharides) can be synthesized within a cell or salvaged from the environment.
Monosaccharides are activated into nucleotide sugars or lipid-linked sugars before they are used as donors for glycan synthesis.
Whereas lipid-linked sugar donors can be flipped across membranes, nucleotide sugars must be transported into the lumen of the ER–Golgi pathway of eukaryotes.
Each linkage unit of a glycan or glycoconjugate is assembled by one or more unique glycosyltransferases.
Many glycosyltransferases are members of multigene families with related functions.
Most glycosyltransferases recognize only the underlying glycan of their acceptor target, but some are protein- or lipid-specific.
Many biosynthetic enzymes (glycosyltransferases, glycosidases, sulfotransferases, etc.) are expressed in a cell type– and in a tissue-specific, temporally regulated manner.
Diversity
Monosaccharides can generate far greater combinatorial diversity than nucleotides or amino acids.
Further diversity arises from branching or covalent modifications of glycans.
Glycosylation introduces a marked diversity in glycoproteins.
Only a limited subset of the potential diversity is found in a given organism or cell type.
Intrinsic diversity (microheterogeneity) can exist in glycoprotein glycans within a cell type or even at a single glycosylation site.
The total expressed glycan repertoire (glycome) of a given cell type or organism is far more complex than the genome or proteome.
The glycome of a given cell type or organism is also dynamic, changing in response to intrinsic and extrinsic signals.
Glycome differences in cell type, space, and time generate biological diversity and can help to explain why only a limited number of genes are expressed from the typical genome.
Recognition
Glycans are recognized by specific glycan-binding proteins that are intrinsic to an organism.
Glycans are also recognized by many extrinsic glycan-binding proteins of pathogens and symbionts.
Glycan-binding proteins fall in two general categories: those that can usually be grouped by shared evolutionary origins and/or similarity in structural folds (lectins) and those that emerged by convergent evolution from different ancestors (e.g., sulfated GAG-binding proteins).
Glycan-binding proteins often show a high degree of specificity for binding to specific glycan structures, but they typically have relatively low affinities for single-site binding.
Biologically relevant lectin recognition often requires multivalency of both the glycan and glycan-binding protein, to generate high avidity of binding.
Genetics
Naturally occurring genetic defects in glycans appear relatively rare in intact organisms. This apparent rarity may be attributed to lack of survival, or a failure of detection, owing to unpredictable or pleiotropic phenotypes.
Genetic defects in cell-surface/secreted glycans in cultured cells often have few biological consequences, whereas the same mutations in intact multicellular organisms may have major phenotypic effects.
Complete elimination of major glycan classes generally causes early developmental lethality.
Organisms bearing tissue-specific alteration of glycans often survive, but with both cell-autonomous and distal biological defects.
Biological roles
Biological roles for glycans span the spectrum from nonessential activities to those that are crucial for the development, function, and survival of an organism.
Glycans can have different roles in different tissues or at different times in development.
Terminal sequences, unusual glycans, and modifications are more likely to mediate specific biological roles and may also reflect evolutionary interactions with microorganisms and other noxious agents.
Many of the major roles of cell-surface glycans involve cell–cell and/or extracellular interactions.
Nuclear/cytosolic glycans have more cell-intrinsic roles (e.g., in signaling).
A priori prediction of functions of a specific glycan or its relative importance to the organism is difficult.
Evolution
Relatively little is still known about glycan evolution.
Interspecies and intraspecies variations in glycan structure are common, suggesting rapid evolution.
The dominant mechanisms for glycan evolution include ongoing selection pressure by pathogens that recognize or mimic host glycans combined with the need to preserve critical intrinsic glycan functions.
Interplay between pathogen selection pressure and preservation of intrinsic roles could result in the formation of “junk” glycans from which new intrinsic functions might arise during evolution.
(ER) Endoplasmic reticulum.
MONOSACCHARIDES ARE THE BASIC STRUCTURAL UNITS OF GLYCANS
Carbohydrates are defined as polyhydroxyaldehydes, polyhydroxyketones and their simple derivatives, or larger compounds that can be hydrolyzed into such units. A monosaccharide is a carbohydrate that usually cannot be hydrolyzed into a simpler form. It has a potential carbonyl group at the end of the carbon chain (an aldehyde group) or at an inner carbon (a ketone group). These two types of monosaccharides are therefore named aldoses and ketoses, respectively (for examples, see below, and for more details, see
Chapter 2
). Free monosaccharides can exist in open-chain or ring forms (
Figure 1.2
). Ring forms of the monosaccharides are the general rule in oligosaccharides, which are linear or branched chains of monosaccharides attached to one another via glycosidic linkages (the term “polysaccharide” is typically used for large glycans composed of repeating oligosaccharide motifs; for examples, see
Chapter 3
). The ring form of a monosaccharide generates a chiral anomeric center at C-1 for aldo sugars or at C-2 for keto sugars (for details, see
Chapter 2
). A glycosidic linkage involves the attachment of a monosaccharide to another residue, typically via the hydroxyl group of this anomeric center, generating α-linkages or β-linkages that are defined based on the relationship of the glycosidic oxygen to the anomeric carbon and ring (
Chapter 2
). These two linkage types confer very different structural properties and biological functions on sequences that are otherwise identical in composition, as classically illustrated by the differences between starch and cellulose (both are homopolymers of glucose, the former largely α1-4-linked and the latter β1-4-linked throughout). A glycoconjugate is a compound in which one or more monosaccharide or oligosaccharide units (the glycone) are covalently linked to a noncarbohydrate moiety (the aglycone). An oligosaccharide that is not attached to an aglycone possesses the reducing power of the aldehyde or ketone in its terminal monosaccharide component, with the exception of oligosaccharides in which the sugars are linked together at their reducing ends, as in derivatives of sucrose or trehalose. The end of a glycan exposing the aldehyde or ketone group is therefore named the reducing terminus or reducing end, terms that tend to be used even when the sugar chain is
attached to an aglycone and has thus lost its reducing power. Correspondingly, the opposite end of the chain tends to be called the nonreducing end (note the analogy to the amino and carboxyl ends of proteins, or the 5′ and 3′ ends of DNA and RNA).
FIGURE 1.2.
Open-chain and ring forms of glucose. Changes in the orientation of hydroxyl groups around specific carbon atoms generate new molecules that have a distinct biology and biochemistry (e.g., galactose is the C-4 epimer of glucose). In the ring form, glucose and other sugars adopt one of two hydroxyl group orientations (α or β) of which the latter is shown here.
GLYCANS CAN CONSTITUTE A MAJOR PORTION OF THE MASS OF A GLYCOCONJUGATE
In naturally occurring glycoconjugates, the portion of the molecule comprising the glycans can vary greatly in contribution to its overall size. In many cases, the glycans comprise a substantial portion of the mass of glycoconjugates (for a typical example, see
Figure 1.3
). For this reason, the surfaces of all types of cells in nature (which are heavily decorated with different kinds of glycoconjugates) are effectively covered with a dense array of sugars, the so-called "glycocalyx." This cell-surface structure was observed many years ago by electron microscopists as a negatively charged coat external to the cell surface membrane in bacteria, which could be stained with ruthenium red and in animal cells in which the anionic coat could be decorated with polycationic reagents (
Figure 1.4
.) Evidence that the “glycocalyx” was enriched in sugars, including protein-bound sialic acid in animal cells, first came from studies of the effect of proteolytic enzymes on the behavior of erythrocytes in cell electrophoresis along with studies of the nature of viral and plant lectin binding sites on this cell type. The density of glycans in the glycocalyx can be remarkably high. For example, it has been calculated that the concentration of sialic acids in the glycocalyx of a typical human B lymphocyte may be >100 m
M
.
FIGURE 1.3.
Schematic representation of the Thy-1 glycoprotein including the three N-glycans (
blue
) and a glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI-glycan;
green
) lipid anchor whose acyl chains (
yellow
) would normally be embedded in the membrane bilayer. Note that the polypeptide (
purple
) represents only a relatively small portion of the total mass of the protein. (Original art courtesy of Mark Wormald and Raymond Dwek, Oxford Glycobiology Institute.)
FIGURE 1.4.
(
Upper left
) Historical electron micrograph of endothelial cells from a blood capillary in the rat diaphragm muscle, showing the lumenal cell membrane of the cells (facing the blood) decorated with particles of cationized ferritin (
arrowheads
). These particles are binding to acidic residues (sialic acid–containing glycans and sulfated glycosaminoglycans) contained in the cell-surface glycocalyx. Note that the particles are several layers deep, indicating the remarkable thickness of this layer of glycoconjugates. (Courtesy of the late George E. Palade, University of California, San Diego). (
Upper right
) Electron micrograph of fibroblast glycocalyx stained with ruthenium red (120,000×). (From Martinez-Palomo A, et al. 1969.
Cancer Res
29:
925–937, with permission from American Association for Cancer Research.) (
Lower left
) Thin section of
Klebsiella pneumonia
showing capsular layers substitution fixed with osmium tetraoxide. Scale bar, 0.5 µm. (From Amako K, et al. 1988.
J Bacteriol
170:
4960–4962, with permission from American Society for Microbiology.) (
Lower right
) Morphologically mature human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1) particles shown by ultrathin section transmission electron microscopy (TS-TEM). Virus-producing H9 cells were treated with 1% tannic acid to render glycoprotein spikes on the virion detectable. The ill-defined aggregate of “spots” represents spikes in a tangential section of a virion. (From Gelderblom HR, et al. 1987.
Virology
156:
171–176, with permission from Elsevier.)
MONOSACCHARIDES CAN BE LINKED TOGETHER IN MANY MORE WAYS THAN AMINO ACIDS OR NUCLEOTIDES
Nucleotides and proteins are linear polymers that can each contain only one basic type of linkage between monomers. In contrast, each monosaccharide can theoretically generate either an α- or a β-linkage to any one of several positions on another monosaccharide in a chain or to another type of molecule. Thus, whereas three different nucleotides or amino acids can only generate six trimers, three different hexoses could theoretically produce (depending on which of their forms are considered) anywhere from 1056 to 27,648 unique trisaccharides. This difference in complexity becomes even greater as the number of monosaccharide units found in natural glycan increases (now numbering in the hundreds). Fortunately for the
student of glycobiology, naturally occurring biological macromolecules in a given species tend to contain relatively few of the possible monosaccharide units, and they are in a limited number of combinations. Of course, the great majority of glycans in most species have yet to be discovered and structurally defined. Thus, much of the possible diversity may yet exist in nature.
COMMON MONOSACCHARIDE UNITS OF GLYCOCONJUGATES
Although several hundred distinct monosaccharides are known in nature, only a minority of these are commonly found in well-studied glycans. Examples of common monosaccharides in vertebrate cells are listed below, along with their standard abbreviations (for details regarding their structures, see
Chapter 2
, and embedded links from the symbols in Online
Appendix 1B
).
Pentoses
: five-carbon neutral sugars—D-xylose (Xyl)
Hexoses
: six-carbon neutral sugars—for example, D-glucose (Glc)
Hexosamines
: hexoses with an amino group at the 2-position, which can be either free or, more commonly, N-acetylated—for example,
N
-acetyl-D-glucosamine (GlcNAc)
6-Deoxyhexoses
: for example, L-fucose (Fuc)
Uronic acids
: hexoses with a carboxylate at the 6-position—for example, D-glucuronic acid (GlcA)
Nonulosonic acids
: family of nine-carbon acidic sugars, of which the most common in animals is the sialic acid
N
-acetylneuraminic acid (Neu5Ac, also sometimes called NeuAc or, historically, NANA) (see
Chapter 15
)
For simplicity, the symbols D- and L- are omitted from the full names of common monosaccharides from here on unless a less common variant occurs. This limited set of monosaccharides dominates the glycobiology of more recently evolved (so-called “higher”) animals, but several others have been found in “lower” animals (e.g., tyvelose [
Chapters 25
and
26
], bacteria and Archaea [e.g., keto-deoxyoctulosonic acid, rhamnose, L-arabinose, and muramic acid;
Chapters 21
and
22
], and plants [e.g., arabinose, apiose, and galacturonic acid;
Chapter 24
]
). A variety of modifications of glycans further enhance their diversity in nature and often serve to mediate specific biological functions. Thus, the hydroxyl groups of different monosaccharides can be subject to modifications such as phosphorylation, sulfation, methylation, O-acetylation, or fatty acylation. Although amino groups are commonly N-acetylated, they can be N-sulfated or remain unsubstituted. Carboxyl groups are occasionally subject to lactonization to nearby hydroxyl groups or even lactamization to nearby amino groups.
Details regarding the structural depiction of monosaccharides, linkages, and oligosaccharides are discussed in
Chapter 2
. Many figures in this volume use a symbolic depiction of sugar chains (see Online
Appendix 1B
and examples in
Figure 1.5
). This Symbol Nomenclature for Glycans (SNFG) is expanded from the Second Edition and has been vetted and adopted by many investigators. For reader convenience, a full table of symbols is reproduced on the inside cover of the book, is available for view at the NCBI Books website (Online
Appendix 1B
), and can be downloaded in drawing and text formats from this website. Detailed notes regarding the logic used for the symbol nomenclature can also be found at the Online
Appendix 1B
, along with embedded links to online databases featuring details about each monosaccharide, as well as color settings information for artists who wish to use the system.
FIGURE 1.5.
Examples of symbols and conventions for drawing glycan structures. The monosaccharide symbol set from the Third Edition of
Essentials of Glycobiology
remains intact but has been extended to cover a wider range of monosaccharides found in nature. For reader convenience, a full table of symbols is reproduced on the inside cover of this book and is available as Online
Appendix 1B
,
Table 1
at the NCBI Books website. A few examples of symbols and the use of this system to depict naturally occurring glycans are shown here. (
Left
) Branched “biantennary” N-glycan from a vertebrate, with two types of outer termini, depicted at different levels of structural details. (
Right
) Examples of glycosaminoglycan (GAG) chains from metazoan animals, a plant glycan, and a bacterial lipopolysaccharide.
MAJOR CLASSES OF GLYCOCONJUGATES AND GLYCANS
The common classes of glycans are primarily defined according to the nature of the linkage to the aglycone (protein or lipid) (for common eukaryotic examples, see
Figures 1.6
and
1.7
). A glycoprotein is a glycoconjugate in which a protein carries one or more glycans covalently attached to a polypeptide backbone, usually via N- or O-linkages. An N-glycan (N-linked oligosaccharide, N-[Asn]-linked oligosaccharide) is a sugar chain covalently linked to an asparagine residue of a polypeptide chain, commonly involving a GlcNAc residue in eukaryotes, and the consensus peptide sequence: Asn-X-Ser/Thr. Animal N-glycans also share a common pentasaccharide core region and can be generally divided into three main classes: oligomannose (or high-mannose) type, complex type, and hybrid type (
Chapter 9
). An O-glycan (O-linked oligosaccharide) is frequently linked to the polypeptide via
N-
acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) to a hydroxyl group of a serine or threonine residue and can be extended into different structural core classes (
Chapter 10
). A mucin is a large glycoprotein that carries many O-glycans that are clustered (closely spaced). Several other types of O-glycans also exist (e.g., O-linked fucose, glucose, or mannose). A proteoglycan is a glycoconjugate that has one or more glycosaminoglycan (GAG) chains (see definition below) attached to a “core protein” through a typical core region that has at its reducing end a xylose residue linked to the hydroxyl group of a serine residue. The distinction between a proteoglycan and a glycoprotein is otherwise arbitrary, because some proteoglycan polypeptides can carry both GAG chains and different O- and N-glycans (
Chapter 17
). Many cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins have single GlcNAc residue on one or more of their serine or threonine residues (
Chapter 19
).
Figure 1.7
provides a listing of known glycan–protein linkages in nature.
FIGURE 1.6.
Common classes of animal glycans. (Modified and updated from Varki A. 1997.
FASEB J
11:
248–255; Fuster M, Esko JD. 2005.
Nat Rev Can
7:
526–542, with permission from Springer Nature and Stanley P. 2011.
Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol
3:
a005199.) (See Online
Appendix 1B
for full names and designated symbols for monosaccharides.)
FIGURE 1.7.
Glycan–protein linkages reported in nature. (Updated and redrawn, with permission of Oxford University Press, from Spiro RG. 2002.
Glycobiology
12:
43R–56R.) Diagrammatic representation of six distinct types of sugar-peptide bonds that have been identified in nature, to date. (See Online
Appendix 1B
for full names of monosaccharides.) (Hyl) Hydroxylysine; (Hyp) hydroxyproline; (C-term) carboxy-terminal amino acid residue. Glypiation is the process by which a glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor is added to a protein. For other details, including anomeric linkages, please see the
Spiro (2002)
review cited above.
A glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor is a glycan bridge between phosphatidylinositol and a phosphoethanolamine that is in amide linkage to the carboxyl terminus of a protein. This structure typically constitutes the only anchor to the lipid bilayer membrane for such proteins (
Chapter 12
). A glycosphingolipid (often named a glycolipid) consists of a glycan usually attached via glucose or galactose to the terminal primary hydroxyl group of the lipid moiety ceramide, which is composed of a long chain base (sphingosine) and a fatty acid (
Chapter 11
). Glycolipids can be neutral or anionic. A ganglioside is an anionic glycolipid containing one or more residues of sialic acid. It should be noted that these represent only the most common classes of glycans reported in eukaryotic cells. There are several other less studied glycan types found on one or the other side of the cell membrane in animal cells (
Chapters 13
,
17
, and
18
) and many others in plants, algae, and prokaryotes.
Although different glycan classes have unique core regions by which they are distinguished, certain outer structural sequences are often shared among different classes of glycans. For example, animal N- and O-glycans and glycosphingolipids frequently carry the subterminal disaccharide Galβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-(
N
-acetyllactosamine or LacNAc) or, less commonly, GalNAcβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-(LacdiNAc) units. The LacNAc units can sometimes be repeated, giving extended poly-
N-
acetyllactosamines (sometimes incorrectly called “polylactosamines”) (
Chapter 14
). Less commonly, the LacdiNAc motif can also be repeated (termed polyLacdiNAc). Outer LacNAc units can be modified by fucosylation or by branching and are typically capped in vertebrates by sialic acids or, less commonly, by sulfate esters, Fuc, α-Gal, β-GalNAc, or β-GlcA units (
Chapters 14
and
15
). In contrast, eukaryotic glycosaminoglycans are linear copolymers of acidic disaccharide repeating units, each typically containing a hexosamine (GlcN or GalN) and a hexose (Gal) or hexuronic acid (GlcA or IdoA) (
Chapter 17
). The type of disaccharide unit defines the glycosaminoglycan as chondroitin or dermatan sulfate (GalNAcβ1-4GlcA/IdoA), heparin or heparan sulfate (GlcNAcα1-4GlcA/IdoA), or keratan sulfate (Galβ1-4GlcNAc). Keratan sulfate is actually a 6-O-sulfated form of poly-
N
-acetyllactosamine attached to an N- or O-glycan core, rather than to a typical Xyl-Ser-containing proteoglycan linkage region. Another type of glycosaminoglycan, hyaluronan (a polymer of GlcNAcβ1-4GlcA), appears to exist primarily as a
free glycan unattached to any aglycone (
Chapter 16
). Some glycosaminoglycans have sulfate esters substituting either amino or hydroxyl groups (i.e., N- or O-sulfate groups). Another anionic polysaccharide that can be extended from LacNAc units is polysialic acid, a homopolymer of sialic acid that is selectively expressed only on a few proteins in vertebrates. Polysialic acids and hyaluronan are also found as the capsular polysaccharides of certain pathogenic bacteria (
Chapter 15
). For simplicity, this section has focused primarily on vertebrate glycans. Many other classes of glycans exist in other branches of the tree of life (
Chapters 21
–
26
).
GLYCAN STRUCTURES ARE NOT ENCODED DIRECTLY IN THE GENOME
Unlike protein sequences, which are primary gene products, glycan structures are not encoded directly in the genome and are secondary gene products. A few percent of known genes in the human genome are dedicated to producing the enzymes and transporters responsible for the biosynthesis and assembly of glycans (
Chapter 8
), typically as posttranslational modifications of proteins or by glycosylation of core lipids. The glycans themselves represent numerous combinatorial possibilities, generated by a variety of competing and sequentially acting glycosidases and glycosyltransferases (
Chapter 6
) and the subcompartmentalized “assembly-line” mechanisms of glycan biosynthesis in the Golgi apparatus of eukaryotes (
Chapter 4
). Thus, even with full knowledge of the expression levels of all relevant gene products, one cannot accurately predict the precise structures of glycans elaborated by a given cell type. Furthermore, small changes in environmental cues can cause dramatic changes in glycans produced by a given cell. It is this variable and dynamic nature of glycosylation that makes it a powerful way to generate and modulate biological diversity and complexity. Of course, it also makes glycans much more difficult to study than nucleic acids and proteins.
SITE-SPECIFIC STRUCTURAL DIVERSITY IN PROTEIN GLYCOSYLATION
One of the most fascinating and yet frustrating aspects of protein glycosylation is the phenomenon of microheterogeneity. Thus, at any particular glycan attachment site on a given protein synthesized by a particular cell type, a range of variations might be found in the structures of the attached glycan (and in some instances, the glycan may be missing). Effectively, a given polypeptide encoded by a single gene can exist in numerous “glycoforms,” each constituting a distinct molecular species. For some glycoproteins the microheterogeneity at a particular site may be quite limited, whereas for other sites it may be extensive, even within the same glycoprotein species. Mechanistically, microheterogeneity might be generated by the rapidity with which multiple, sequential, partially competitive glycosylation and deglycosylation reactions take place in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and Golgi apparatus, through which a newly synthesized glycoprotein passes, along with the lack of a template for directing the synthesis and the accessibility of glycans at a site to the modifying enzymes (
Chapter 4
). An alternate possibility is that each individual cell or cell type is in fact exquisitely specific in the glycosylation it produces, but that intercellular variations result in the observed microheterogeneity of samples from natural multicellular sources. Whatever the origin of microheterogeneity, it explains the anomalous behavior of glycoproteins in analytical/separation techniques and makes complete structural analysis of a glycoprotein a difficult task. From a functional point of view, the biological significance of microheterogeneity remains unclear. It is possible that this is a type of diversity generator, intended for diversifying endogenous recognition functions and/or for evading microbes and parasites, each of which can bind with high specificity only to certain glycan structures (
Chapters 37
and
42
).
CELL BIOLOGY OF GLYCOSYLATION
Most well-characterized pathways for the biosynthesis of major classes of eukaryotic glycans are within ER and Golgi compartments (
Chapter 4
). Newly synthesized proteins originating in the ER are either cotranslationally or posttranslationally modified with glycans at various stages in their itinerary toward their final destinations. N-glycans are partially assembled on lipid donors on the cytoplasmic face of the ER and then flipped across the membrane where the oligosaccharide assembly is completed and transfer to the nascent protein occurs. This oligosaccharide is then trimmed and extended by the addition of one monosaccharide at a time as the protein passes through the ER and the Golgi. These glycosylation reactions use activated forms of monosaccharides (nucleotide sugars;
Chapter 5
) as donors for reactions that are catalyzed by glycosyltransferases (for details about their biochemistry, molecular genetics, and cell biology, see
Chapters 4
,
6
, and
8
). The nucleotide sugar donors are synthesized within the cytosolic or nuclear compartment from monosaccharide precursors of endogenous or exogenous origin and then actively transported across a membrane bilayer into the lumen of the ER and Golgi compartments (
Chapter 5
). Notably, the portion of the glycoconjugate that faces the inside of these compartments will ultimately face the outside of the cell or the inside of a secretory granule or lysosome and will be topologically unexposed to the cytosol. The biosynthetic enzymes (glycosyltransferases, sulfotransferases, etc.) responsible for catalyzing these reactions are well studied (
Chapter 6
), and their location has helped to define various functional compartments of the ER–Golgi pathway. A classical model envisioned that these enzymes are physically lined up along this pathway in the precise sequence in which they actually work. This model appears to be oversimplified, as there is considerable overlap in the distribution of these enzymes, and the actual distribution of a given enzyme depends on the cell type.
All topological considerations mentioned above are reversed with regard to nuclear and cytoplasmic glycosylation, because the active sites of the relevant glycosyltransferases face the cytosol, which is in direct communication with the interior of the nucleus. Until the mid-1980s, the accepted dogma was that glycoconjugates occurred exclusively on the outer surface of cells, on the internal (luminal) surface of intracellular organelles, and on secreted molecules. The cytosol and nucleus were assumed to be devoid of glycosylation capacity. However, it is now clear that certain distinct types of glycoconjugates are synthesized and reside within the cytosol and nucleus (
Chapter 18
). Indeed, one of them, named O-GlcNAc (
Chapter 19
), may well be numerically the most common type of glycoconjugate in many cell types. The fact that this major form of glycosylation was missed by so many investigators for so long serves to emphasize the relatively unexplored state of the field of glycobiology.
Like all components of living cells, glycans are constantly being turned over by degradation and the enzymes that catalyze this process cleave glycans either at the outer (nonreducing) terminus (exoglycosidases) or internally (endoglycosidases) (
Chapters 4
and
44
). Some terminal monosaccharide units such as sialic acids are sometimes removed and new units reattached during endosomal recycling, without degradation of the underlying chain. The final complete degradation of most eukaryotic glycans is generally performed by multiple glycosidases in the lysosome. Once degraded, their individual unit monosaccharides are then typically exported from the lysosome into the cytosol for reuse (
Figure 1.8
). In contrast to the relatively slow turnover of glycans derived from the ER–Golgi pathway, the O-GlcNAc monosaccharide modifications of the nucleus and cytoplasm appear more dynamic (
Chapter 19
). In some instances, extracellular or intracellular free glycans can also serve as signaling molecules (
Chapter 40
).
FIGURE 1.8.
Biosynthesis, use, and turnover of a common monosaccharide. This schematic shows the biosynthesis, fate, and turnover of galactose, a common monosaccharide constituent of animal glycans. Although small amounts of galactose can be taken up from the outside of the cell, most cellular galactose is either synthesized de novo from glucose or recycled from degradation of glycoconjugates in the lysosome. The figure is a simplified view of the generation of the UDP nucleotide sugar UDP-Gal, its equilibrium state with UDP-glucose, and its uptake and use in the Golgi apparatus for synthesis of new glycans. (
Solid lines
) Biochemical pathways; (
dashed lines
) pathways for the trafficking of membranes and glycans.
TOOLS USED TO STUDY GLYCOSYLATION
Unlike oligonucleotides and proteins, glycans are not commonly found in a linear, unbranched fashion. Even when linear (e.g., GAGs), they often contain a variety of substituents, such as sulfate groups, which are not uniformly distributed. Thus, complete sequencing of glycans is usually impossible by a single method and requires iterative combinations of physical, chemical, and enzymatic approaches that together yield the details of structure (for a discussion of low- and high-resolution separation and analysis, including mass spectrometry and nuclear magnetic resonance [NMR], see
Chapter 50
). Less detailed information on structure may be sufficient to explore the biology of some glycans and can be obtained by simple techniques, such as the use of enzymes (endoglycosidases and exoglycosidases), lectins, and other glycan-binding proteins (
Chapters 48
and
50
), chemical modification or cleavage, metabolic radioactive labeling, antibodies, or cloned glycosyltransferases (
Chapters 53
and
54
). Glycosylation can also be perturbed in various ways, for example, by glycosylation inhibitors and primers (
Chapters 55
and
56
) and by genetic manipulation of glycosylation in intact cells and organisms (
Chapter 49
). Directed in vitro synthesis of glycans by chemical and enzymatic methods has also made great strides in recent years, providing many new tools for exploring glycobiology (
Chapters 53
,
54
, and
57
). The generation of complex glycan libraries by a variety of routes has further enhanced this interface of chemistry and biology (
Chapters 53
and
54
), including the generation of glycan microarrays.
GLYCOMICS
Analogous to genomics and proteomics, glycomics represents the systematic methodological elucidation of the “glycome” (the totality of glycan structures) of a given cell type or organism (
Chapters 51
and
52
). In reality, the glycome is far more complex than the genome or proteome.
In addition to the vastly greater structural diversity in glycans, one is faced with the complexities of glycosylation microheterogeneity (see above) and the dynamic changes that occur in the course of development, differentiation, metabolic changes, aging, malignancy, inflammation, or infection. Added diversity arises from intraspecies and interspecies variations in glycosylation. Thus, a given cell type in a given species can manifest a large number of possible glycome states. Glycomic analysis today generally consists of extracting entire cell types, organs, or organisms; releasing all the glycan chains from their linkages; and cataloging them via approaches such as mass spectrometry. In a variation called glycoproteomics, the glycans are analyzed while still attached to protease-generated fragments of glycoproteins. The results obtained represent a spectacular improvement over what was possible a few decades ago, but they are still analogous to cutting down all the trees in a forest and cataloging them, without attention to the layout of the forest and the landscape (
Chapter 15
discusses this complex issue from the perspective of just one monosaccharide class, sialic acids; see
Figure 15.3
).
Glycomic analysis thus needs to be complemented by classical methods such as tissue-section staining or flow cytometry, using lectins or glycan-specific antibodies that aid in understanding the glycome by taking into account the heterogeneity of glycosylation at the level of the different cell types and subcellular domains in the tissue under study. This is even more important because of the common observation that removing cells from their normal milieu and placing them into tissue culture can result in major changes in the glycosylation machinery of the cell. However, such classical approaches suffer from poor quantitation and relative insensitivity to structural details. A combination of the two approaches is now potentially feasible via laser-capture microdissection of specific cell types directly from tissue sections, with the resulting samples being studied by mass spectrometry. New methods for in situ imaging and characterization of glycans in the intact “forest” are clearly needed.
Because most of the genes involved in glycan biosynthetic pathways have been cloned from multiple organisms, it is possible today to obtain an indirect genomic and transcriptomic view of the glycome in a specific cell type (
Chapter 8
). However, given the relatively poor correlation between mRNA and protein levels, and the complex assembly line and competitive nature of the cellular Golgi glycosylation pathways, even complete knowledge of the mRNA expression patterns of all relevant genes in a given cell cannot allow accurate prediction of the distribution and structures of glycans in that cell type. Thus, there is as yet no reliable indirect route toward elucidating the glycome, other than by actual analysis using an array of methods.
GLYCOSYLATION DEFECTS IN ORGANISMS AND CULTURED CELLS
Many mutant variants of cultured cell lines with altered glycan structures and specific glycan biosynthetic defects have been described, the most common of which are lectin-resistant (
Chapter 49
). Indeed, with few exceptions, mutants with specific defects at most steps of the major pathways of glycan biosynthesis have been found in cultured animal cells. The use of such cell lines has been of great value in elucidating the details of glycan biosynthetic pathways. Their existence implies that many types of glycans are not crucial to the optimal growth of single cells growing in the sheltered and relatively unchanging environment of the culture dish. Rather, most glycan structures must be more important in mediating cell–cell and cell–matrix interactions in intact multicellular organisms and/or interactions between organisms. In keeping with this supposition, genetic defects completely eliminating major glycan classes in intact animals all cause embryonic lethality (
Chapter 45
). As might be expected, naturally occurring viable animal mutants of this type tend to have disease phenotypes of intermediate severity and show complex phenotypes involving multiple systems. Less severe genetic alterations of outer chain components of glycans tend to give viable organisms with more specific phenotypes
(
Chapter 45
). Overall, there is much to be learned by studying the consequences of natural or induced genetic defects in intact multicellular organisms, including humans (
Chapter 45
).
BIOLOGICAL ROLES OF GLYCANS ARE DIVERSE
A major theme of this volume is the exploration and elucidation of the biological roles of glycans. It is interesting to note that, in the short time since the first edition, we have gone from asking “what is it that glycans do anyway?” to having to explain a large number of complex and sometimes nonviable glycosylation-modified phenotypes in humans, mice, flies, and other organisms. Like any biological system, the optimal approach carefully considers the relationship of structure and biosynthesis to function (
Chapter 7
). As might be imagined from their ubiquitous and complex nature, the biological roles of glycans are remarkably varied. Indeed, asking what these roles are is akin to asking the same question about proteins. Thus, all of the proposed theories regarding glycan function turn out to be partly correct, and exceptions to each can also be found. Not surprisingly for such a diverse group of molecules, the biological roles of glycans also span the spectrum from those that are subtle to those that are crucial for the development, growth, function, or survival of an organism (
Chapter 7
). The diverse functions ascribed to glycans can be simply divided into two general categories: (i) structural and modulatory functions (involving the glycans themselves or their modulation of the molecules to which they are attached) and (ii) specific recognition of glycans by glycan-binding proteins. Of course, any given glycan can mediate one or both types of functions. The binding proteins in turn fall into two broad groups: lectins and sulfated GAG-binding proteins (
Chapters 27
,
28
, and
38
). Such molecules can be either intrinsic to the organism that synthesized the cognate glycans (e.g., see
Chapters 31
–
36
, 38, and 39) or extrinsic (see
Chapters 37
and
42
for information concerning microbial proteins that bind to specific glycans on host cells). The atomic details of these glycan–protein interactions have been elucidated in many instances (
Chapters 29
and
30
). Although there are exceptions to this notion, the following general theme has emerged regarding lectins: monovalent binding tends to be of relatively low affinity, and such systems typically achieve their specificity and function by achieving high avidity, via interactions of multivalent arrays of glycans with cognate lectin-binding sites.
GLYCOSYLATION CHANGES IN DEVELOPMENT, DIFFERENTIATION, AND MALIGNANCY
Whenever a new tool (e.g., an antibody or lectin) specific for detecting a particular glycan is developed and used to probe its expression in intact organisms, it is common to find exquisitely specific temporal and spatial patterns of expression of that glycan in relation to cellular activation, embryonic development, organogenesis, and differentiation (see
Chapter 41
for examples). Certain relatively specific changes in expression of glycans are also often found in the course of transformation and progression to malignancy (
Chapter 47
), as well as other pathological situations such as inflammation (
Chapter 46
). These spatially and temporally controlled patterns of glycan expression imply the involvement of glycans in many normal and pathological processes, the precise mechanisms of which are understood in only some cases.
EVOLUTIONARY CONSIDERATIONS IN GLYCOBIOLOGY
Remarkably little is still known about the evolution of glycosylation. There are clearly shared and unique features of glycosylation in different kingdoms and taxa. Among animals, there
may be a trend toward increasing complexity of N- and O-glycans in more recently evolved (“higher”) taxa. Intraspecies and interspecies variations in glycosylation are also relatively common. It has been suggested that the more specific biological roles of glycans are often mediated by uncommon structures, unusual presentations of common structures, or further modifications of the commonly occurring saccharides themselves. Such unusual structures likely result from unique expression patterns of the relevant glycosyltransferases or other glycan-modifying enzymes. On the other hand, such uncommon glycans can be targets for specific recognition by infectious microorganisms and various toxins. Thus, at least some of the diversity in glycan expression in nature must be related to the evolutionary selection pressures generated by interspecies interactions (e.g., of host with pathogen or symbiont). In other words, the two different classes of glycan recognition mentioned above (mediated by intrinsic and extrinsic glycan-binding proteins) are in competition with each other with regard to a particular glycan target. The specialized glycans expressed by parasites and microbes that are of great interest from the biomedical point of view (
Chapters 21
,
22
,
23
, and
43
) may themselves be subject to evolutionary selection pressures. These issues are further considered in
Chapter 20
, which also discusses the limited information concerning how various glycan biosynthetic pathways appear to have evolved and diverged in different life-forms.
GLYCANS IN MEDICINE AND BIOTECHNOLOGY
Numerous natural bioactive molecules are glycoconjugates, and the attached glycans can have dramatic effects on the biosynthesis, stability, action, and turnover of these molecules in intact organisms. For example, the sulfated glycosaminoglycan heparin and its derivatives are among the most commonly used drugs in the world. The aminoglycoside antibiotics all have carbohydrate components essential for activity. For this and many other reasons, glycobiology and carbohydrate chemistry have become increasingly important in modern biotechnology. Patenting a glycoprotein drug, obtaining FDA approval for its use, and monitoring its production all require knowledge of the structure of its glycans. Moreover, glycoproteins, which include monoclonal antibodies, enzymes, and hormones, are by now the major products of the biotechnology industry, with sales in the tens of billions of dollars annually, which continues to grow at an increasing rate. In addition, several human disease states involve changes in glycan biosynthesis that can be of diagnostic and/or therapeutic significance. The emerging importance of glycobiology in medicine and biotechnology is discussed in
Chapters 56
and
57
.
GLYCANS IN NANOTECHNOLOGY, BIOENERGY, AND MATERIALS SCIENCE
Although not traditionally considered part of “Glycobiology,” many natural and synthetic glycans are key components of Nanotechnology, Bioenergy, and Material Science. Glyconanomaterials (
Chapter 58
) have tunable chemical and physical properties and can be built on different scaffolds to probe cellular, tissue, and organismal interactions. Attached glycans can change nanomaterial properties, optimizing solubility and biocompatibility and lowering cytotoxicity. Glyconanomaterials have been used as imaging agents, spectroscopic tools, monitors of cellular systems, and vehicles for vaccination and drug delivery. Plant glycans are used for many purposes: energy sources, building materials, clothes, paper products, animal feed, and food and beverage additives (
Chapter 59
). Concerns about detrimental environmental effects and diminishing reserves of petroleum and its by-products have greatly renewed interest in using plant glycans for energy production, generation of polymers with improved or new functionalities, and as sources of high-value chemosynthetic precursors (
Chapter 59
).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors acknowledge contributions to the previous version of this chapter from the late Nathan Sharon, as well as helpful comments and suggestions from other editors.
FURTHER READING
Rademacher TW, Parekh RB, Dwek RA. 1988. Glycobiology.
Annu Rev Biochem
57
: 785–838. doi:
10.1146/annurev.bi.57.070188.004033
Varki A. 1993. Biological roles of oligosaccharides: all of the theories are correct.
Glycobiology
3
: 97–130. doi:
10.1093/glycob/3.2.97
Drickamer K, Taylor ME. 1998. Evolving views of protein glycosylation.
Trends Biochem Sci
23
: 321–324. doi:
10.1016/s0968-0004(98)01246-8
Etzler ME. 1998. Oligosaccharide signaling of plant cells.
J Cell Biochem Suppl
30–31
: 123–128.
Gagneux P, Varki A. 1999. Evolutionary considerations in relating oligosaccharide diversity to biological function.
Glycobiology
9
: 747–755. doi:
10.1093/glycob/9.8.747
Roseman S. 2001. Reflections on glycobiology.
J Biol Chem
276
: 41527–41542. doi:
10.1074/jbc.r100053200
Hakomori S-I. 2002. The glycosynapse.
Proc Natl Acad Sci
99
: 225–232. doi:
10.1073/pnas.012540899
Spiro RG. 2002. Protein glycosylation: nature, distribution, enzymatic formation, and disease implications of glycopeptide bonds.
Glycobiology
12
: 43R–56R. doi:
10.1093/glycob/12.4.43r
Haltiwanger RS, Lowe JB. 2004. Role of glycosylation in development.
Annu Rev Biochem
73
: 491–537. doi:
10.1146/annurev.biochem.73.011303.074043
Sharon N, Lis H. 2004. History of lectins: from hemagglutinins to biological recognition molecules.
Glycobiology
14
: 53R–62R. doi:
10.1093/glycob/cwh122
Drickamer K, Taylor ME. 2006.
Introduction to glycobiology
, Vol. 2. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Ohtsubo K, Marth JD. 2006. Glycosylation in cellular mechanisms of health and disease.
Cell
126
: 855–867. doi:
10.1016/j.cell.2006.08.019
Patnaik SK, Stanley P. 2006. Lectin-resistant CHO glycosylation mutants.
Methods Enzymol
416
: 159–182. doi:
10.1016/s0076-6879(06)16011-5
Kamerling J, Boons G-J, Lee Y, Suzuki A, Taniguch N, Voragen AGJ. 2007.
Comprehensive glycoscience
, pp. 1–4. Elsevier Science, London.
Freeze HH, Ng BG. 2011. Golgi glycosylation and human inherited diseases.
Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol
3
: a005371. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a005371
Hart GW, Slawson C, Ramirez-Correa G, Lagerlof O. 2011. Cross talk between O-GlcNAcylation and phosphorylation: roles in signaling, transcription, and chronic disease.
Annu Rev Biochem
80
: 825–858. doi:
10.1146/annurev-biochem-060608-102511
Sarrazin S, Lamanna WC, Esko JD. 2011. Heparan sulfate proteoglycans.
Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol
3
: a004952. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a004952
Varki A. 2011. Evolutionary forces shaping the Golgi glycosylation machinery: why cell surface glycans are universal to living cells.
Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol
3
: a005462. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a005462
Aebi M. 2013. N-linked protein glycosylation in the ER.
Biochim Biophys Acta
1833
: 2430–2437. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.04.001
Prasanphanich NS, Mickum ML, Heimburg-Molinaro J, Cummings RD. 2013. Glycoconjugates in host–helminth interactions.
Front Immunol
4
: 240. doi:
10.3389/fimmu.2013.00240
Varki A. 2013. Omics: account for the ‘dark matter’ of biology.
Nature
497
: 565. doi:
10.1038/497565
Belardi B, Bertozzi CR. 2015. Chemical lectinology: tools for probing the ligands and dynamics of mammalian lectins in vivo.
Chem Biol
22
: 983–993. doi:
10.1016/j.chembiol.2015.07.009
Endo T. 2015. Glycobiology of α-dystroglycan and muscular dystrophy.
J Biochem
157
: 1–12. doi:
10.1093/jb/mvu066
Misra S, Hascall VC, Markwald RR, Ghatak S. 2015. Interactions between hyaluronan and its receptors (CD44, RHAMM) regulate the activities of inflammation and cancer.
Front Immunol
6
: 201. doi:
10.3389/fimmu.2015.00201
Varki A, Cummings RD, Aebi M, Packer NH, Seeberger PH, Esko JD, Stanley P, Hart G, Darvill A, Kinoshita T, Et al. 2015. Symbol nomenclature for graphical representations of glycans.
Glycobiology
25
: 1323–1324. doi:
10.1093/glycob/cwv091
Aoki-Kinoshita K, Agravat S, Aoki NP, Arpinar S, Cummings RD, Fujita A, Fujita N, Hart GM, Haslam SM, Kawasaki T, Et al. 2016. GlyTouCan 1.0—the international glycan structure repository.
Nucl Acids Res
44
: D1237–D1242. doi:
10.1093/nar/gkv1041
Cook GMW. 2016. Glycobiology of the cell surface: its debt to cell electrophoresis 1940-65.
Electrophoresis
37
: 1399–1406. doi:
10.1002/elps.201500476
Varki A. 2017. Biological roles of glycans.
Glycobiology
27
: 3–49. doi:
10.1093/glycob/cww086

Essentials of Glycobiology, Fourth Edition
2
Monosaccharide Diversity
Peter H. Seeberger
INTRODUCTION TO GLYCAN TERMINOLOGY
MONOSACCHARIDES: BASIC STRUCTURES AND STEREOISOMERISM
MONOSACCHARIDES EXIST PRIMARILY IN CYCLIC FORM
Formation of Hemiacetals
CHEMISTRY AT THE ANOMERIC CENTER
Mutarotation
Oxidation and Reduction
Schiff Base Formation
Glycosidic Bond Formation
CHEMISTRY OF MONOSACCHARIDE FUNCTIONAL GROUPS
Methylation of Hydroxyl Groups
Esterification of Hydroxyl Groups
Deoxygenation of Hydroxyl Groups
Amino Groups
GLYCOSIDIC LINKAGES
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
FURTHER READING
T
his chapter covers the basic building blocks of glycans and fundamental considerations regarding glycan structure by introducing chemical concepts. Modes of linking glycans and structural depiction of the same are discussed to provide the groundwork for understanding longer glycans (
Chapter 3
).
INTRODUCTION TO GLYCAN TERMINOLOGY
In this book, as well as in the earlier editions, the term glycan is used. Still, a host of names are commonly used to refer to sugar polymers in other textbooks and the literature. In the 19th century, sugar-based substances were referred to as carbohydrates, or “hydrates of carbon,” that are based on the general formula C
x
(H
2
O)
n
that also possess a carbonyl group, either an aldehyde or a ketone. Monosaccharides are the simplest of these polyhydroxylated carbonyl compounds (saccharide is derived from the Greek word for sugar or sweetness).
Monosaccharides are joined together to give rise to oligosaccharides or polysaccharides. Typically, the term “oligosaccharide” refers to any glycan that contains less than 20 monosaccharide residues connected by glycosidic linkages. The term “polysaccharide” is typically used to denote any linear or branched polymer consisting of monosaccharide residues, such as cellulose (
Chapters 14
and
24
).
Thus, the relationship of monosaccharides to oligosaccharides or polysaccharides is analogous to that of amino acids and proteins or nucleotides and nucleic acids (polynucleotides).
The term “glycoconjugate” is often used to describe a macromolecule that contains monosaccharides covalently linked to proteins or lipids. The prefix “glyco” and the suffixes “saccharide” and “glycan” indicate the presence of carbohydrate constituents (e.g., glycoproteins, glycolipids, and proteoglycans). Just as is observed with proteins in nature, additional structural diversity can be imparted to glycans by modifying their hydroxyl groups with phosphate, sulfate, or acetyl esters, and/or their amino groups with acetyl or sulfate groups.
A carbohydrate may be termed “complex” if it contains more than one type of monosaccharide building unit. The glucose-based polymer cellulose is an example of a “simple” carbohydrate, whereas a galactomannan polysaccharide, composed of both galactose and mannose, is an example of a complex carbohydrate. However, even so-called simple glycans, such as cellulose and starch, often have very complex molecular structures in three dimensions. The term complex carbohydrates includes glycoconjugates, whereas the term carbohydrates per se would not. Additional nomenclature issues are covered in this chapter and
Chapter 3
. A more detailed and comprehensive listing of carbohydrate nomenclature rules has been published (see
McNaught 1997
and
Varki et al. 2015
in Further Reading at the end of this chapter, and Online
Appendix 1B
).
MONOSACCHARIDES: BASIC STRUCTURES AND STEREOISOMERISM
The classification of monosaccharide structures began in the late 19th century with the pioneering work of Emil Fischer. All simple monosaccharides have the general empirical formula C
x
(H
2
O)
n
, where
n
is an integer ranging from 3 to 9. As mentioned briefly in
Chapter 1
, all monosaccharides consist of a chain of chiral hydroxymethylene units, which terminates at one end with a hydroxymethyl group and at the other with either an aldehyde group (aldoses) or an α-hydroxy ketone group (ketoses). Glyceraldehyde is the simplest aldose and dihydroxyacetone is the simplest ketose (
Figure 2.1
). The structures of glyceraldehyde and dihydroxyacetone are distinct in that glyceraldehyde contains an asymmetric (chiral) carbon atom (
Figure 2.1
), whereas dihydroxyacetone does not. With the exception of dihydroxyacetone, all monosaccharides have at least one asymmetric carbon atom, the total number being equal to the number of internal (CHOH) groups (
n
–2 for aldoses and
n
–3 for ketoses with
n
carbon atoms). The number of stereoisomers corresponds to 2
k
, where
k
equals the number of asymmetric carbon atoms. For example, an aldohexose with the general formula C
6
H
12
O
6
and four asymmetric carbon atoms (i.e., four (CHOH) groups) can be described in 16 possible isomeric forms (
Figure 2.1
).
FIGURE 2.1.
Structures of glyceraldehyde and dihydroxyacetone. (
A
) Fischer projection. (
B
) D- and L-glyceraldehyde. The chiral central carbon in glyceraldehyde gives rise to two possible configurations of the molecule, termed D and L.
The numbering of carbon atoms follows the rules of organic chemistry nomenclature. The aldehyde carbon is referred to as C-1 and the carbonyl group in ketoses is referred to as C-2. The overall configuration (D or L) of each sugar is determined by the absolute configuration of the stereogenic center furthest from the carbonyl group (i.e., with the highest numbered asymmetric carbon atom; this is C-5 in hexoses and C-4 in pentoses). The configuration of a monosaccharide is most easily determined by representing the structure in a Fischer projection. If the OH (or other non-H group) is on the right in the Fischer projection, the overall configuration is D. If the OH (or other non-H group) is on the left, the overall configuration is L (
Figure 2.2
). This figure also shows D- and L-glucose in the cyclic form (chair conformation) found in solution. Most vertebrate monosaccharides have the D configuration with the exception of fucose and iduronic acid (IdoA) L sugars. The Fischer projections shown in
Figure 2.3
illustrate the acyclic structures of all D-aldoses through the aldohexose group.
FIGURE 2.2.
D- and L-glucopyranose in Fischer projection and chair conformation.
FIGURE 2.3.
Fischer projections for the acyclic forms of the D series of aldoses, ranging from triose to hexose.
Any two sugars that differ only in the configuration around a single chiral carbon atom are called epimers. For example, D-mannose is the C-2 epimer of D-glucose, whereas D-galactose is the C-4 epimer of D-glucose (
Figure 2.4
). Monosaccharide names are frequently abbreviated; most common are three-letter abbreviations for simple monosaccharides (e.g., Gal, Glc, Man, Xyl, Fuc). There are nine common monosaccharides found in vertebrate glycoconjugates (
Figure 2.4
). Once incorporated into a glycan, these nine monosaccharide building blocks can be further modified to generate additional sugar structures. For example, glucuronic acid (GlcA) can be epimerized at C-5 to generate IdoA. Many more monosaccharides exist in glycoconjugates from other species and as intermediates in metabolism. We use a symbolic notation for the monosaccharides that are most abundant in vertebrate glycoconjugates (see
Chapter 1
).
FIGURE 2.4.
Common monosaccharides found in vertebrates.
N
-Acetylneuraminic acid is the most common form of sialic acid.
MONOSACCHARIDES EXIST PRIMARILY IN CYCLIC FORM
Monosaccharides exist in solution as an equilibrium mixture of acyclic and cyclic forms. The percentage of each form depends on the sugar structure. The cyclic form of a monosaccharide is characterized by a hemiacetal group formed by the reaction of one of the hydroxyl groups with the C-1 aldehyde or ketone. For reasons of chemical stability, five- and six-membered rings are most commonly formed from acyclic monosaccharides. Hexoses (six-carbon aldoses) and hexuloses (six-carbon ketoses) form six-membered rings via a C-1—O—C-5 ring closure; they form five-membered rings through a C-1—O—C-4 ring closure (
Figure 2.5
). A five-membered cyclic hemiacetal is labeled a “furanose” and a six-membered cyclic hemiacetal is called a “pyranose.” Pentoses can form both pyranose and furanose forms.
FIGURE 2.5.
Cyclization of acyclic D-glucose to form pyranose and furanose structures. The cyclization reaction produces both the α and β anomers (i.e., C-1 epimers).
Formation of Hemiacetals
Monosaccharides can also be represented as Haworth projections in which both five- and six-membered cyclic structures are depicted as planar ring systems, with the hydroxy groups oriented either above or below the plane of the ring (
Figure 2.6
). Although not truly representative of the three-dimensional structure of a monosaccharide, the Haworth representation has been used since the late 1920s as an easy-to-draw formula that permits a quick evaluation of stereochemistry around the monosaccharide ring. The Haworth representations are preferably drawn with the ring oxygen atom at the top (for furanose) or the top right-hand corner (for pyranose) of the structure; the numbering of the ring carbons increases in a clockwise direction.
FIGURE 2.6.
Conversion from Fischer to Haworth projection. Each hydroxyl group projected to the right in the Fischer projection points down in the Haworth formula.
For any D sugar, the conversion of a Fischer projection into a Haworth projection proceeds as follows: (1) any groups (atoms) that are directed to the right in the Fischer structure are given a downward orientation in the Haworth structure, (2) any groups (atoms) that are directed to the left in the Fischer structure are given an upward orientation in the Haworth structure, and (3) the terminal —CH
2
OH group is given an upward orientation in the Haworth structure. For an L sugar, (1) and (2) are the same, but the terminal —CH
2
OH group is projected downward.
The planar Haworth structures are distorted representations of the actual molecules. The preferred conformation of a pyranose ring is the “chair” conformation, similar to the structure of cyclohexane. The conversion from Haworth projection to chair conformation leaves the downward or upward orientation of ring substituents unaltered. Two chair conformations can be distinguished and designated as
4
C
1
and
1
C
4
, respectively (
Figure 2.7A
), and these conformers can interconvert by a process called the “ring flip.” The first numeral in the chair conformer designation (superscript) indicates the number of the ring carbon atom above the “seat of the chair (C)” and the second numeral (subscript) indicates the number of the ring carbon atom below the plane of the seat (spanned by C-2, C-3, C-5, and the ring O). Chair conformations are designated from structures with the ring oxygen atom in the top right-hand corner of the ring “seat,” resulting in the clockwise appearance of the ring numbering. To determine the stereochemistry in the chair form as it corresponds to the Fischer projection, one can locate C-6 and then trace along the carbon skeleton of the sugar, bisecting the C—O and C—H bonds formed from each atom. The OH (or OR) and H groups are found on the right (R) or left (L) sides, just as in the Fischer projection (
Figure 2.8
).
FIGURE 2.7.
Chair conformations. (
A
) β-D-Glucose in Haworth projection and in its
4
C
1
and
1
C
4
chair conformations; (
B
) envelope and twist conformations for a five-membered ring structure.
FIGURE 2.8.
Conversion from Fischer to chair projection formula; (R) right; (L) left.
Red arrows
illustrate the path to follow along the sugar backbone when correlating the stereochemistry of the Fischer projection with the chair conformation.
The more structurally accurate chair representations are preferred to Haworth projections for depicting pyranoses. However, Haworth projections are convenient and are commonly used to depict furanoses. The furanose ring is rather flexible and not entirely flat in any of its energetically favored conformations; for example, it has a slight pucker when viewed from the side, as seen in the representations of the so-called envelope and twist (or skew) conformations (
Figure 2.7B
).
Because furanoses can adopt many low-energy conformations, researchers have adopted the Haworth projection as a simple means to avoid this complexity.
CHEMISTRY AT THE ANOMERIC CENTER
Mutarotation
When cyclized into rings, monosaccharides acquire an additional asymmetric center derived from the carbonyl carbon atom (
Figure 2.5
). The new asymmetric center is termed the “anomeric carbon” (i.e., C-1 in the ring form of glucose). Two stereoisomers are formed by the cyclization reaction because the anomeric hydroxy group can assume two possible orientations. When the configurations are the same at the anomeric carbon and the stereogenic center furthest from the anomeric carbon, the monosaccharide is defined as the α anomer. When the configurations are different, the monosaccharide is defined as the β anomer (
Figure 2.9
). Unlike the other stereocenters on the monosaccharide ring, which are configurationally stable, the anomeric center can undergo an interconversion of stereoisomers via the process of mutarotation. Catalyzed by dilute acid or base, the reaction proceeds by the reverse of the cyclization reaction. The monosaccharide ring opens up and then recloses to form a ring with the other anomeric configuration (
Figure 2.5
). The term mutarotation derives from the rapid change in optical rotation (denoted [α] D) that is observed when an anomerically pure form of a monosaccharide is dissolved in water. For example, β-D-glucopyranose shows an initial rotation of +19°, whereas the α anomer shows an initial rotation of +112°. When either anomer is allowed to undergo the mutarotation reaction, an equilibrium mixture containing both anomers is obtained, producing a rotation of +52.5°.
FIGURE 2.9.
Determination of configuration at the anomeric center.
Oxidation and Reduction
Generally, the acyclic (aldehyde or ketone) form of a monosaccharide is only present in minor amounts in an equilibrium mixture (<0.01%). Nevertheless, the open-chain aldehydes or ketones can participate in chemical reactions that drive the equilibrium and eventually consume the sugar.
Aldoses and ketoses were historically referred to as “reducing sugars” because they responded positively in a chemical test that effected oxidation of their aldehyde and hydroxyketone functionalities, respectively. The carboxylic acid formed by oxidation of the aldehyde in an aldose is referred to as a glyconic acid (e.g., gluconic acid is the oxidation product of glucose). It is also possible to oxidize the hydroxyl groups of monosaccharides, most notably the terminal OH group (i.e., C-6 of glucose). In this reaction, a glycuronic acid is produced, and if both terminal groups are oxidized, the product is a glycaric acid. The three acids derived from D-glucose are illustrated in
Figure 2.10
. These compounds have a tendency to undergo intramolecular cyclization reactions, preferably yielding six-membered lactones. Two examples of lactonized forms are shown in
Figure 2.11
. Oxidized forms of monosaccharides can be found in nature. For example, GlcA is an abundant component of many glycosaminoglycans (see
Chapter 17
).
FIGURE 2.10.
Oxidized forms of D-glucose.
FIGURE 2.11.
Conversion of a monosaccharide to a tritium-labeled alditol by reduction with NaB
3
H
4
.
The carbonyl groups of aldoses and ketoses also can be reduced with sodium borohydride (NaBH
4
) to form polyhydroxy alcohols, referred to as alditols. This reaction is widely used to introduce a radiolabel at C-1 of the monosaccharide by reduction with NaB
3
H
4
(
Figure 2.11
).
Schiff Base Formation
The aldehyde and ketone groups of monosaccharides can also undergo Schiff base formation with amines or hydrazides, forming imines and hydrazones, respectively (
Figure 2.12
). This reaction is often used to conjugate the monosaccharide to proteins (via their lysine residues) or to biochemical probes such as biotin hydrazide. It should be noted that the imines formed with amino groups are not stable to water and are typically reduced with sodium cyanoborohydride (NaCNBH
3
) in a process termed reductive amination.
FIGURE 2.12.
Conjugation of a monosaccharide to an amino group by formation of an imine. The
filled circle
represents any small molecule or macromolecule containing an amine.
As aldehydes, reducing sugars can also form Schiff bases with amino groups of the lysine residues in proteins. This nonenzymatic process that links glycans to proteins is termed “glycation” and is distinct from “glycosylation,” which involves the formation of a glycosidic bond between the sugar and protein. Glycation products can undergo further reactions that lead to the formation of protein cross-links, and these can have pathogenic consequences (i.e., they are immunogenic and change the properties of the protein). Glycation products of glucose accumulate at higher levels in diabetics than in healthy individuals because of elevated blood glucose levels. These modified proteins are thought to underlie some of the pathologies associated with diabetes.
Glycosidic Bond Formation
Two monosaccharide units can be joined together by a glycosidic bond—this is the fundamental linkage among the monosaccharide building blocks found in all oligosaccharides. The glycosidic bond is formed between the anomeric carbon of one monosaccharide and a hydroxyl group of another. In chemical terms, a hemiacetal group reacts with an alcohol group to form an acetal. Glycosidic bonds can be formed with virtually any hydroxylated compound, including simple alcohols such as methanol (
Figure 2.13
) or hydroxy amino acids such as serine, threonine, and tyrosine. Indeed, glycosidic linkages are formed between sugars and these amino acids within proteins to form glycoproteins (see
Chapters 9
and
10
). Like the hemiacetal, the acetal or glycosidic linkage can exist in two stereoisomeric forms: α and β. But unlike the hemiacetal, the acetal is configurationally stable under most conditions. Thus, once a glycosidic bond is formed, its configuration is maintained. Like acetals in general, glycosidic bonds can be hydrolyzed in dilute acid, generating the constituent monosaccharides from oligosaccharides.
FIGURE 2.13.
Glycoside formation. Conversion of a hemiacetal into an acetal.
Glycosidic bond construction is the central challenge of glycan synthesis and immense efforts have been devoted to high-yielding and stereoselective glycosylation reactions. An overview of glycan synthesis strategies is provided in
Chapters 53
and
54
.
CHEMISTRY OF MONOSACCHARIDE FUNCTIONAL GROUPS
Methylation of Hydroxyl Groups
The hydroxyl groups present in both monosaccharides and oligosaccharides can be chemically modified without affecting the glycosidic linkages. Methylation is used in the structural analysis of glycans (see
Chapter 50
). Natural products containing partially methylated glycans are known and a number of methyltransferases have been identified.
Esterification of Hydroxyl Groups
A variety of different enzymes can esterify the hydroxyl groups of glycans to transiently vary glycan structure. Esterification is sometimes required for interactions with other biomolecules. The most important types of sugar esters in nature are phosphate esters (including diphosphate esters), acyl esters (with acetic acid or fatty acids), and sulfate esters. Acyl esters can sometime migrate to other hydroxyl groups on the same monosaccharide.
Deoxygenation of Hydroxyl Groups
The replacement of monosaccharide hydroxyl groups with hydrogen atoms forms deoxysugars. Nature has evolved enzymes to perform this reaction in a minimum number of steps, whereas chemically multistep procedures are required. Deoxygenation of ribose within a ribonucleotide to form the 2-deoxyribonucleotide is a critical reaction in DNA biosynthesis. Fucose (Fuc), one of the common vertebrate monosaccharides, is deoxygenated at C-6 during its biosynthesis from mannose (
Chapter 5
).
Amino Groups
Many monosaccharides contain N-acetamido groups, such as GlcNAc, GalNAc, and NeuNAc. Free amino groups, formed by de-N-acetylation of the N-acetamido group, are rare and found in heparan sulfate (HS) (
Chapter 17
), glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchors (
Chapter 12
), neuraminic acid (
Chapter 15
), and in many bacterial glycan structures (
Chapter 20
). Amino groups can be modified with sulfates, similar to hydroxyl groups, as found in HS.
GLYCOSIDIC LINKAGES
A variety of linkages can be formed between two monosaccharides. The glycosidic linkage can give rise to two possible stereoisomers at the anomeric carbon of one sugar (α or β). Also, the many hydroxyl groups of the other sugar permit several possible regioisomers. Two glucose residues, for example, can be joined together in numerous ways, as illustrated by maltose (Glcα4Glc) and gentiobiose (Glcβ6Glc) (
Figure 2.14
). These isomers have very different three-dimensional structures and biological activities. A monosaccharide can engage in more than two glycosidic linkages, thus serving as a branchpoint. The common occurrence of branched sequences (as opposed to the linear sequences that are found in almost all peptides and oligonucleotides) is unique to glycans and contributes to their structural diversity.
FIGURE 2.14.
Two isomeric disaccharides.
The relationship of the glycosidic bond to oligosaccharides is analogous to the relationship of the amide bond to polypeptides and the phosphodiester bond to polynucleotides. However, amino acids and nucleotides are linked in only one fashion during the formation of polypeptides and nucleic acids, respectively; there is no stereochemical or regiochemical diversity in these biopolymers. The number of monomeric residues contained in an oligosaccharide is designated in the nomenclature—disaccharide, trisaccharide, and so on. Just as polypeptides have amino and carboxyl termini and polynucleotides have 5′ and 3′ termini, oligosaccharides have a polarity that is defined by their reducing and nonreducing termini (
Figure 2.15
). The reducing end of the oligosaccharide bears a free anomeric center that is not engaged in a glycosidic bond and thus retains the chemical reactivity of the aldehyde. However, it continues to be referred to as reducing end even when it is engaged in a linkage (e.g., to the hydroxyl of serine or threonine in glycoproteins). Structures are commonly written from the nonreducing end on the left toward the reducing end on the right. For some structures, there is no reducing end. For example, the common disaccharides sucrose and trehalose have glycosidic linkages between the anomeric centers of two monosaccharide constituents (
Figure 2.16
).
FIGURE 2.15.
Reducing and nonreducing ends of a disaccharide.
FIGURE 2.16.
Nonreducing disaccharides.
The glycosidic linkage is the most flexible part of a disaccharide structure. Whereas the chair conformation of the constituent monosaccharides is relatively rigid, the torsion angles around the glycosidic bond (φ, ψ, and ω;
Figure 2.17
) can vary. Thus, a disaccharide of well-defined
primary structure can adopt multiple conformations in solution that differ in the relative orientation of the two monosaccharides. The combination of structural rigidity and flexibility is typical of complex carbohydrates and essential to their biological functions.
FIGURE 2.17.
Torsion angles that define the conformation of the glycosidic linkages φ, ψ, and ω. (
A
) Newman projection along the C1—O1 bond illustrating φ for the 1-6 glycosidic bond. (
B
) Newman projection along the C6′—O1 bond illustrating ψ for a 1 → 6 linkage (
C
) Newman projection along the C5′—C6′ bond illustrating ω for the 1 → 6 linkage. The lobes on the glycosidic oxygen atom represent lone pairs of electrons. The torsion angles depicted are arbitrary and do not necessarily reflect the most stable conformation.
Glycans are linked to other biomolecules, such as lipids or amino acids within polypeptides, through glycosidic linkages to form glycoconjugates (see
Chapters 9
,
10
,
11
, and
12
). Glycans are often referred to as the glycone of a glycoconjugate and the noncarbohydrate component is named the aglycone. The glycan may be a mono- or an oligosaccharide.
In conclusion, monosaccharide building blocks can be linked to various regio- and stereochemistries, and the resulting oligosaccharides can be assembled on protein or lipid scaffolds (see
Chapter 3
).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors acknowledge contributions to previous versions of this chapter by Carolyn R. Bertozzi and David Rabuka and appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Dirk Lefeber, Todd Lowary, and Sriram Neelamegham.
FURTHER READING
El Khadem HS. 1988.
Carbohydrate chemistry: monosaccharides and their oligomers
. Academic, San Diego.
Allen HJ, Kisailus EC. 1992.
Glycoconjugates: composition, structure, and function
. Marcel Dekker, New York.
McNaught AD. 1997. Nomenclature of carbohydrates.
Carbohydr Res
297
: 1–92. doi:
10.1016/S0008-6215(97)83449-0
Bill MR, Revers L, Wilson IBH. 1998.
Protein glycosylation
. Kluwer Academic, Boston.
Boons G-J. 1998.
Carbohydrate chemistry
. Blackie Academic and Professional, London.
Stick RV. 2001.
Carbohydrates: the sweet molecules of life
. Academic, New York.
Varki NM, Varki A. 2007. Diversity in cell surface sialic acid presentations: implications for biology and disease.
Lab Invest
87
: 851–857. doi:
10.1038/labinvest.3700656
Varki A, Cummings RD, Aebi M, Packer NH, Seeberger PH, Esko JD, Stanley P, Hart G, Darvill A, Kinoshita T, et al. 2015. Symbol nomenclature for graphical representations of glycans.
Glycobiology
25
: 1323–1324. doi:
10.1093/glycob/cwv091

Essentials of Glycobiology, Fourth Edition
3
Oligosaccharides and Polysaccharides
Carlito B. Lebrilla, Jian Liu, Göran Widmalm, and James H. Prestegard
GLYCANS IN NATURE ARE OFTEN CONJUGATED
DIVERSITY FROM OLIGOSACCHARIDE BRANCHING
STRUCTURAL AND STORAGE POLYSACCHARIDES
CELL-SURFACE POLYSACCHARIDES OF ANIMALS
Structure–Function Relationships of Animal Polysaccharides
Cellular Regulation of the Structures of GAGs
BACTERIAL POLYSACCHARIDES
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
FURTHER READING
T
his chapter discusses the diversity in structure and properties that results when multiple monosaccharides (
Chapter 2
) are linked together to form oligosaccharides and polysaccharides (the latter comprising much of the biomass on the planet). Some examples of the more complex polymeric assemblies that occur in nature are presented, and how these remarkable structures are generated is discussed.
GLYCANS IN NATURE ARE OFTEN CONJUGATED
Except in their roles as sources of energy for living organisms, sugars seldom occur in nature as monosaccharides. Instead, they serve as building blocks for more complex molecules. In the most common process, an initial sugar is linked to an aglycone (often a lipid or a protein) and this sugar is further elaborated by covalently joining other sugars through glycosidic linkages (
Chapter 2
) between the anomeric carbon of the sugar being added and a hydroxyl oxygen of an existing sugar. The resulting glycans are called oligosaccharides (usually less than a dozen monosaccharides) or polysaccharides (usually more than a dozen monosaccharides). The latter are usually built on a core of repeating subunits of linked monosaccharides. The way in which assembly of both oligosaccharides and polysaccharides occurs produces structures of enormous diversity and widely varying properties. This allows glycans to fill roles that vary from cell-surface interactions with proteins important in differentiation, recognition, and proliferation of cells, to interactions with other glycans that generate the mechanical properties of plant and microbial cell walls.
DIVERSITY FROM OLIGOSACCHARIDE BRANCHING
Diverse structures can be created by simply linking different monosaccharides through glycosidic bonds, to make oligosaccharides or polysaccharides. The diversity arises not only from the choice of sugars but also from the way they are linked. If there were just one way to link monosaccharides, the choice among the dozen or so commonly used sugars would make the resulting polysaccharides more diverse than polynucleotides (four nucleotide choices for DNA and RNA) but less diverse than polypeptides (20 amino acid choices for mammalian proteins). However, the possibility of making glycosidic bonds between the anomeric carbon of one sugar and any one of the unmodified hydroxyl groups in another mono- or oligosaccharide adds to the diversity, by allowing not only more linear products, but also branched products in which more than one hydroxyl group on a given sugar is used to make glycosidic bonds. In addition, each anomeric carbon is a stereogenic center, and therefore each glycosidic linkage can be constructed having either the α- or β-configuration. Building an oligosaccharide, such as a tetrasaccharide (four sugars) with an unlinked reducing end, using only a single sugar in one ring form, such as glucopyranose, the authors could construct 1792 distinct structures. Of course, not all theoretically possible molecules are produced in nature because of the lack of enzymes to build them, but many are made contributing to the wide range of functional properties that allow carbohydrates to play many important roles.
Branching is a prime characteristic of many glycans found on mammalian cell surfaces. Glycans representing two major types of eukaryotic protein glycosylation are shown in
Figure 3.1
. An N-glycan makes a glycosidic bond with the side-chain nitrogen of an asparagine residue that is a part of a consensus peptide sequence NX(S/T). An O-glycan makes a glycosidic bond with the terminal oxygen of a serine or threonine residue. N-Glycans contain a core composed of three mannose residues and two
N
-acetylglucosamine residues (Manα1-6[Manα1-3]Manβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-N-Asn). The depicted glycan is a biantennary glycan with branches linked at the 3- and 6-positions of the first mannose residue in the glycan chain. However, more complex structures exist with three and four branches. Details of the synthesis and biological importance of these glycans are presented in
Chapter 9
. The depicted O-glycan contains a typical core structure (one of four common cores) that begins at the reducing end with an
N
-acetylgalactosamine α-linked to a serine or threonine (GlcNAcβ1-6[Galβ1-3]GalNAcα1-O-Ser/Thr). It begins as a biantennary structure but can be further extended toward the nonreducing end to form more complex structures.
The synthesis and biological importance of O-glycans are described in
Chapters 10
(O-GalNAc) and
19
(O-GlcNAc).
FIGURE 3.1.
Examples of branched structures in N- and O-linked glycans.
Both glycans depicted are terminated with a sialic acid (often Neu5Ac in humans) at their nonreducing end. Sialylation is characteristic of mammalian glycans and important for immune response. In protein–glycan interactions, not only are particular residues recognized, but often their position in a branching structure is recognized as well. An interesting example is the interaction of the enzyme that adds the 2-6-linked sialic acids to the termini of N-glycans. It has a high preference for adding to the 1-3-linked branch (by more than an order of magnitude) despite the fact that the residues on both branches are identical back to the mannose at the branch point (Galβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-2Manα-). This may give some indication of the extent to which branching plays a role in recognition processes.
Unique among mammals are free oligosaccharides present in milk. Human milk oligosaccharides (HMOs) are highly abundant in breast milk. Unlike most glycans that are conjugated to either proteins or lipids, HMOs are unconjugated in their native states. Thus, they contain a reactive aldehyde on the reducing end. HMOs decrease during lactation but are often even more abundant than proteins. Although the precise details of their synthesis are still not well known, HMO structures are more similar to glycans on glycolipids and O-glycans on proteins. The structures are based on a lactose core (Galβ1-4Glc) and extend either in branched or linear forms. Extensions are composed primarily of glucose, galactose, N-acetylglucosamine, fucose, and sialic acids. As molecules, they are generally small, with the majority of the structures in the range of three to six monosaccharides; however, structures with more than 20 monosaccharides have been observed. HMO structures have been characterized by advanced glycomic analytical tools such as liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC-MS) (see
Chapter 50
). Hundreds of structures have been observed, although one mother typically produces about 100 structures.
There are two HMO phenotypes (from four genotypes) that determine the types of structures in the milk. Mothers who secrete their blood type or the Lewis b epitope are termed secretors. Secretors produce structures that contain α1-2-linked fucose. Nonsecretors produce little or no α1-2-linked fucose but instead produce fucosylated glycans that are primarily (1-3)- or (1-4)-linked. One of the most abundant components in milk of secretor mothers is 2-fucosyllactose, whereas nonsecretor mothers produce very little or none of this compound. Similarly, secretor milk is slightly richer in fucosylated compounds, whereas nonsecretor milk is slightly richer in sialylated compounds.
HMOs have altered our concept of the function of food. Human milk was thought to be primarily nutritive. However, despite the large abundances of HMOs in the milk, there are no human enzymes in the infant gut that can degrade them. Instead, characterization of the gut microbiome of infants have revealed that HMOs are primarily food for the gut bacteria. Indeed,
Bifidobacteria
, found in the microbiome of heathy breastfed infants, have glycosyl hydrolases that specifically catabolize HMOs. Additionally, HMOs may also have a protective role by blocking the binding of pathogens in the gut.
STRUCTURAL AND STORAGE POLYSACCHARIDES
Linkage variation plays an important role in the structural properties of polysaccharides as illustrated for two closely related glucose polymers having repeating units (RUs) of -[4Glcβ1-]
n
and -[4Glcα1-]
n
. The former is the structural polymer, cellulose, that forms the foundation of all plant cell walls and is a major component of materials such as wood and cotton. The latter is starch, an easily digestible material with no significant structural utility. The ability of one polymer to associate in long fibrils having both crystalline and amorphous regions contributing to its structural properties, and the lack of these tendencies in the other polymer, is clearly
linked to the stereochemistry at the anomeric carbon (β for cellulose and α for starch) and the preferred torsional angles about the C1′-O4 and O4-C4 bonds of the glycosidic linkages. The torsion angles are referred to as φ and ψ, much the same as primary structural variables in polypeptides; by International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) convention they are defined by four connected atoms, O5′-C1′-O4-C4 and C1′-O4-C4-C3, respectively. Because the torsion angle can be monitored directly through couplings between protons at the ends of the glycosidic linkage observed in nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra, an alternate NMR definition is also in common use—namely, H1′-C1′-O4-C4 for φ and C1′-O4-C4-H4 for ψ. Glycosidic torsion angles differ considerably in crystalline cellulose and starch. Using IUPAC definitions they prefer ∼−95° and ∼+95° in the former and ∼+115° and ∼+120° in the latter.
Figure 3.2
depicts these differences in the repeating disaccharide units of cellulose and starch as represented by the isolated disaccharides having common names cellobiose and maltose, respectively. These local preferences influence association properties and ultimately structural characteristics. When extended to a long cellulose polymer, cellobiose units generate elongated strands that can pack and interact with other strands through hydrogen bonds to form layers. Layers in turn interact through a combination of forces to form fibrils composed of 18 polymer chains. The more helical strands in starch cannot pack easily and result in a more amorphous material.
FIGURE 3.2.
Repeating units from cellulose and starch showing conformation and glycosidic torsion angles φ and ψ.
Other important polysaccharides, such as pectins found in plant cell walls, help plants accommodate changes during growth. Pectins are some of the most complex polymers in nature. They are based on polymers of α(1-4)-linked galacturonic acid (GalA) or the RU, -2)-α-L-Rha-(1-4)-α-D-GalA-(1-, and may contain additional sugar and nonsugar substituents, including methyl and acetyl esters. The negatively charged carboxyl group at the 6-position of the GalA residues contributes to the water solubility of these polymers and the long-range interactions that give them gelling properties useful in the food industry. Oligo- and polysaccharides of plant origin are discussed in detail in
Chapter 24
.
Animals also use polysaccharides for various purposes. Glycogen is a storage polymer related to starch in that it is a glucose polymer with primarily α(1-4)-linkages connecting glucose residues, but it is highly branched having additional α(1-6)-linkages to some of the glucose residues. Structural polymers also exist; for example, the repeating polymer of
N
-acetylglucosamine, -[4GlcNAcβ1-]
n
, is the primary component of chitin, the material that forms the exoskeletons of arachnids, crustaceans, and insects (
Chapter 26
). Modifications of glucose residues by replacing the hydroxyl group at 2-position with an amine group and subsequent N-acetylation change the structural properties significantly. These changes allow for the formation of composites with proteins and minerals that lead to additional variation in structure and function.
CELL-SURFACE POLYSACCHARIDES OF ANIMALS
Most cell-surface polysaccharides found in animals belong to a class of glycans known as glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) (
Chapter 17
). Abundantly present on the cell surface as well as in the extracellular matrix, GAGs are linear macromolecules with molecular mass of >15,000 Da. The building blocks of most GAGs are composed of an amino-substituted sugar and a hexuronic acid residue. Modifications on the sugar residues—in particular, the sulfation of hydroxyl or the amino groups—are common. The sulfates and hexuronic acid carboxylate groups are negatively charged under physiological conditions. Thus, GAGs are the most anionic molecules present in the animal kingdom. Commonly found GAGs include chondroitin sulfate, dermatan sulfate, heparan sulfate (HS), hyaluronic acid, and keratan sulfate. These GAGs structurally differ in their disaccharide RUs. For example, chondroitin sulfates consist of disaccharide RUs of [4GlcAβ1-3GalNAcβ1-]
n
, whereas HS consists of disaccharide RUs of [4GlcAβ1-4GlcNAcα1-]
n
or [4IdoAα1-4GlcNSα1-]
n
(
Figure 3.3A
). Structural diversity of these polymers is primarily a result of additional sulfation of hydroxyl groups and is discussed below for the diverse HS polymers found in mammals. GAGs found in other animals can be distinct from mammalian GAGs by virtue of further modifications. For example, marine invertebrates can carry particularly unique sulfation patterns (i.e., 3-O-sulfation on GlcA residues) and distinct side-chain modifications (i.e., fucosylation on chondroitin sulfate).
FIGURE 3.3.
Structures of (
A
) disaccharide repeating units of different glycosaminoglycans and (
B
) the conformations of monosaccharides from heparan sulfate.
Structure–Function Relationships of Animal Polysaccharides
GAGs show biological function primarily through their interactions with the hundreds of GAG-binding proteins found on cellular surfaces and in extracellular spaces. The structural factors that affect the strength and specificity of binding are key to the elicitation of a proper biological response. HS, the most studied member of the GAG family, provides a good illustration of the wide range of physiological and pathophysiological functions affected. HS, for example, is involved in trimolecular interactions with growth factors and growth factor receptors, and thereby participates in regulating embryonic development. HS interacts with proteases and protease inhibitors in the blood to control the coagulation process and binds to viral envelope proteins as a receptor for viral infections. Also, heparin, a highly sulfated form of HS, is a commonly used anticoagulant drug in the clinic. A more complete discussion of the biological function of HS can be found in
Chapters 17
and
Chapter 38
. This section uses the interaction between HS and proteins to illustrate how structural factors affect binding between GAGs and proteins in general.
One factor that contributes to the structural diversity of HS-protein interactions is the conformational flexibility of L-IdoA and its derivative, L-IdoA2S (2-
O
-sulfo iduronic acid). Present in the pyranose form, the six-membered ring structure of IdoA or IdoA2S can adopt either chair or skew-boat conformations (
Figure 3.3B
). Until now, only the
4
C
1
chair conformation has been verified experimentally for GlcA and GlcN in HS, but both the
1
C
4
chair and the
2
S
0
conformations have been found for IdoA2S residues in crystal structures containing HS. In solution, NMR studies show IdoA2S and IdoA residues to be present in a mixture of
1
C
4
and
2
S
0
conformations. The conformational flexibility in IdoA residues likely allows orientation of the sulfate groups in HS to maximize the binding affinity to proteins. Structural elements that dictate preferences for one form over the other, including the possible effects from the sulfated monosaccharide sequences around the IdoA/IdoA2S residue, are subject to further investigation.
A second factor contributing to structural diversity and selective interactions with certain HS-binding proteins is the size of the sulfated saccharide domains. HS isolated from natural sources shows domain-like structures, with clusters of six to eight saccharides forming the highly sulfated domains known as S-domains. These regions are separated by nonsulfated saccharide residues, consisting of GlcA-GlcNAc RUs, known as NAc-domains. The S-domains contain primarily IdoA residues that likely contribute the flexibility needed to optimize binding to proteins and elicit desired biological activities. The contribution of NAc-domains to the functions of HS has not been fully established. However, a possible role may be to appropriately position S-domains in a single polysaccharide chain for interaction with multiple proteins. One example is the interaction of heparin with antithrombin and thrombin. In this complex, one part of the heparin chain interacts with antithrombin, and another part of the heparin chain interacts with thrombin. Between the antithrombin-binding domain and thrombin-binding domain, a linker of six to seven saccharide residues exists.
Cellular Regulation of the Structures of GAGs
Unlike proteins and nucleic acids, the biosynthesis of GAGs is not regulated by a well-defined template. Instead, each member of the GAG family is synthesized by a unique pathway (
Chapter 17
). The HS synthesis pathway, for example, involves multiple enzymes, including specific glycosyltransferases (or HS polymerase), an epimerase, and several sulfotransferases. Moreover, HS is biosynthesized as a polymer covalently linked to a proteoglycan that consists of a core protein and polysaccharide side chains; the functions of these proteoglycans are, in fact, dominated by the properties of the HS chains added. Although this is a non-template-driven process, the overall structures of HS generally remain unchanged between generations. There is considerable interest in understanding the mechanism that controls the structure of HS.
The biosynthesis of chondroitin sulfate and dermatan sulfate is less understood than that of HS. Chondroitin sulfate tends to be synthesized on different proteoglycan core proteins and requires a different set of polymerases and sulfotransferases than the enzymes specifically recognizing HS polysaccharides. To synthesize the IdoA residues in dermatan sulfate, a specialized epimerase is required. Hyaluronic acid biosynthesis is quite different: it is not synthesized on a core protein, it does not take place in the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi, and it only requires one hyaluronic acid synthase (a dual activity glycosyltransferase), as the polysaccharide does not contain sulfate groups or IdoA residues (
Chapter 16
).
BACTERIAL POLYSACCHARIDES
The interactions of bacteria with their environment provide an excellent example of how polysaccharide properties play an important role in an organism's survival. Bacterial polysaccharides are especially diverse, in that they can include a larger number of distinct sugar residues in their RUs (usually two to six residues), and they can include branching. Many of them are parts of bacterial cell membranes where they serve important structural and protective roles. Because of their location on the outside of the cell, bacterial polysaccharides such as lipopolysaccharides (LPSs), capsular polysaccharides (CPSs), and exopolysaccharides (EPSs) are often potent antigens that elicit a strong immune response in humans. LPSs carry long polysaccharides called O-antigens and are unique to Gram-negative bacteria where they constitute the major component of the outer leaflet of the outer membrane. These types of bacteria may also carry CPSs forming a relatively dense additional layer around the bacterial cell. Cell wall lipoteichoic acids and teichoic acids are unique components of Gram-positive bacteria, which are often surrounded by a CPS or a less dense EPS layer.
The variation in biosynthetic pathways among bacterial species is ultimately responsible for the diversity in bacterial polysaccharides. The biosynthesis of bacterial polysaccharides is discussed further in
Chapter 21
. Here the authors present a few examples to illustrate how synthesis of backbone structures, branching, and postpolymerization modification lead to a diverse set of polymer structures. In one of the biosynthetic pathways, sugar residues are added sequentially onto an anchor molecule; thus, the polymer is growing from the terminal, nonreducing end until a termination entity/substituent is added that precludes further chain elongation—for example, in the O-antigen polysaccharide of the LPS from
Escherichia coli
O8 (
Figure 3.4A
). The polymer is linear, and although sugar residues are added step-by-step to form the polysaccharide, RUs can be identified.
FIGURE 3.4.
Schematic representation in SNFG (Symbol Nomenclature for Glycans) format of repeating units of bacterial polysaccharides: (
A
) O-antigen of
E. coli
O8, (
B
) O-polysaccharide of
Salmonella enterica
O54, (
C
) O-antigen of
E. coli
O168, (
D
) O-polysaccharide of
Helicobacter pylori
, (
E
) O-antigen of
Shigella flexneri
serotype 7a, (
F
) exopolysaccharide S-194 (rhamsan) from
Alcaligenes
, and (
G
) exopolysaccharide from
Lactobacillus helveticus
.
Some heteropolysaccharides contain two alternating sequentially added sugar residues and a formal RU can be identified. Often a processive glycosyltransferase is responsible for forming this pattern as is the case in the synthesis of the O-polysaccharide of
Salmonella enterica
O54 (
Figure 3.4B
). When two sugar residues alternate, branched structures can be formed, as one sugar may give rise to the polymer backbone and one a side chain.
Polysaccharides are not always built from the nonreducing end, and preformed subunits can be used in the assembly. For example, synthesis of the
E. coli
antigens O5ab and O5ac relies on a preformed linear oligosaccharide, with five sugar residues constituting the RU. The oligosaccharide is built on an undecaprenyl pyrophosphoryl glycoside anchor molecule. This oligosaccharide is then added
onto
another oligosaccharide–lipid anchor to grow the polymer from the “reducing end.” When polymerization is taking place at the penultimate sugar of the oligosaccharide a branched RU results (cf. O-antigen of
E. coli
O168 [
Figure 3.4C
]).
Branching can be introduced by the addition of sugars following polymer backbone formation.
Helicobacter pylori
O-antigens often contain human blood group structures as part of their RUs.
N
-acetyl-D-glucosamine and D-galactose are added in a processive manner onto an undecaprenyl pyrophosphoryl carrier, thereby forming a linear polysaccharide composed of Galβ1-4GlcNAc (LacNAc) disaccharide RUs. Subsequently, L-fucosyl residues are added onto the backbone polysaccharide resulting in branched Lewis-type structures (
Figure 3.4D
).
Bacterial saccharides consist of diverse monosaccharides (
Chapter 2
) including 6-deoxy-hexoses like L-rhamnose or L-fucose as well as rare sugars that are often found at the terminal position of the oligosaccharide–lipid acceptors. On polymerization, the rare monosaccharides become part of the side chain in branched structures and give rise to structural epitopes that are characteristic for bacterial species. In some cases, these epitopes are the basis for molecular mimicry (
Chapter 42
). Furthermore, these sugar residues constitute the terminal entity of the polysaccharide chain, which can be recognized by antibodies of the immune system. The polysaccharide may also be decorated by substituents such as amino acids, O-acyl, or phosphodiester groups. It is not uncommon to find O-acetyl groups at the branch-point sugar residue, thereby leading to a highly crowded substitution pattern in which all positions on the sugar residue are either part of a glycosidic linkage or carry a nonsugar substituent. Examples of diversity by substituent addition are the O-antigens of
Shigella flexneri
in which glucosyl, O-acetyl, or phosphoethanolamine groups are added to the backbone (
Figure 3.4E
).
Branching and substituent addition affect the properties of polysaccharide solutions, such as gelling and high viscosity. Some polymers are known under their commercial names gellan, welan, and rhamsan (S-194) (
Figure 3.4F
). The differences among these and similar types of polymers are based on acyl substituents such as O-acetyl or O-succinyl groups and side chains consisting of
L
-Rha/
L
-Man, di-glucosyl or di-rhamnosyl groups, as well as an
L
-Rha/
L
-Man backbone modification.
The size of polysaccharides produced by bacteria can vary widely. Whereas the O-antigens in LPSs have less than 100 RUs, CPSs and EPSs have higher numbers of RUs (10
3
–10
5
). Branched structures are often present in these polysaccharides (
Figure 3.4G
) with either more than one
sugar residue in the side chain or with two branches within the RU. More information on these complex materials is presented in
Chapter 42
.
Charge can significantly affect polysaccharide properties. Charged polysaccharides form a common subclass of bacterial polymers and are mostly present in the form of negatively charged sugar residues or as a result of the addition of negatively charged substituents. Uronic acids (e.g., GlcA) and nonulosonic acids (e.g., Neu5Ac, Sia) introduce negative charge into the RU, thereby rendering the polysaccharide a polyanionic polymer, much like the GAGs found in mammalian systems. Substituents on sugar residues such as pyruvate, phosphate and sulfate groups confer polyanionic character. The charged groups can be present both in the polysaccharide backbone and the side chains. Positively charged amines are sometimes present in the RU in conjunction with a negatively charged group. The CPSs from
Neisseria meningitidis
are representative for these types of polysaccharides. Types B and C are homopolymers of Neu5Ac and types W-135 and Y contain disaccharide RUs with Neu5Ac and a hexose.
Flexibility is a significant variable in bacterial polysaccharides (cf. the torsion angles φ and ψ). However, when the linkage is formed via O6, an additional degree of freedom becomes available at the glycosidic linkage (namely, the torsion angle ω) because of the exocyclic hydroxymethyl group in hexopyranoses. A (1-6)-linkage in the backbone of polysaccharides (
Figure 3.4G
) may result in a less rigid polymer with higher flexibility and random coil character. Likewise, the occurrence of this linkage in the side chains will make them more flexible. When furanose residues are part of the polymer, different ring conformations provide more options for introducing flexibility.
Cross-linking is another way that physical properties of bacterial polysaccharides can be varied. The cell wall of Gram-positive bacteria contains a particularly thick layer of peptidoglycan covalently cross-linked via short peptide sequences. Furthermore, teichoic acid polymers, built from glycerol or ribitol residues joined by phosphodiester linkages, are located within the cell wall. Mono- or disaccharide RUs containing amino sugars can be part of these repetitive structures, thereby giving rise to different cell wall teichoic acids. Polymers having a phosphodiester linkage in the backbone as part of the RU are referred to as “teichoic acid type.” CPSs of
Haemophilus influenzae
are built on this theme in which two (serotypes a and b) have RUs consisting of [ribitol-
P
-Hex-]
n
and two others (serotypes c and f) are made of [Hex-
P
-Hex-]
n
.
In summary, bacterial polysaccharides highlight the many ways in which diversity is built into oligo- and polysaccharides. Some diversity results from a larger set of sugar residues, some from branching, and some from modification with a wide variety of substituents, such as phosphate, sulfate, acyl, and amino groups. This diversity gives rise to different physical properties. It allows
bacteria to mimic their hosts in an attempt to evade detection, and it provides a means of distinguishing self from competitive organisms. Structures discussed in this chapter are depicted in abbreviated IUPAC/IUBMB (International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology) form in
Table 3.1
for comparison to the common names, symbolic representations, and actual chemical structures used in the text and figures. This chapter serves as a preview of glycans discussed more thoroughly in the following chapters.
TABLE 3.1.
Oligosaccharides and polysaccharide repeating units
Common name
Figure
Representative structure
Chapter
N-linked glycan
3.1
Galβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-2Manα1-6[Neu5Acα1-6Galβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-2Manα1-3]Manβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-N-Asn
9
O-linked glycan
3.1
GlcNAcβ1-6[Galβ1-3]GalNAcα1-O-Ser/Thr
10
O-linked glycan
GlcNAcβ1-O-Ser/Thr
19
Cellulose
3.2
-[4Glcβ1-]
n
24
Starch
3.2
-[4Glcα1-]
n
24
Chitin
-[4GlcNAcβ1-]
n
26
Chondroitin sulfate
3.3
-[4GlcAβ1-3GalNAc4/6Sβ1-]
n
17
Heparan sulfate
3.3
-[4GlcAβ1-4GlcNAcα1-]
n
+-[4IdoA2Sα1-4GlcNS6Sα1-]
m
17
Capsular polysaccharide
-[6Glcα1-4Neu5Acα2-]
n
21
LPS O-antigen
3.4D
-[4GalNAcβ1-4[Fucα1-3]GlcNAcβ1-]
n
21
Exopolysaccharide
3.4G
-[6Glcβ1-6Galβ1-4Galα1-3[Galβ1-6]Galβ1-4Glcβ1-]
n
21
(LPS) Lipopolysaccharide.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors acknowledge contributions to previous versions of this chapter by Carolyn R. Bertozzi and David Rabuka and appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Jenny Mortimer, Breeanna Urbanowicz, and Darón Freedberg.
FURTHER READING
Laremore TN, Zhang F, Dordick JS, Liu J, Linhardt RJ. 2009. Recent progress and applications in glycosaminoglycan and heparin research.
Curr Opin Chem Biol
13
: 633–640. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpa.2009.08.017
Zivkovic AM, German JB, Lebrilla CB, Mills DA. 2011. Human milk glycobiome and its impact on the infant gastrointestinal microbiota.
Proc Natl Acad Sci
108
: 4653–4658. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1000083107
DeAngelis PL, Liu J, Linhardt RJ. 2013. Chemoenzymatic synthesis of glycosaminoglycans: re-creating, re-modeling, and re-designing nature's longest or most complex carbohydrate chains.
Glycobiology
23
: 764–777. doi:
10.1093/glycob/cwt016
Cosgrove DJ. 2021. Re-constructing our models of cellulose and primary cell wall assembly.
Curr Opin Plant Biol
22
: 122–131. doi:
10.1016/j.pbi.2014.11.001
Schmid J, Sieber V. 2015. Enzymatic transformations involved in the biosynthesis of microbial exo-polysaccharides based on the assembly of repeat units.
Chembiochem
16
: 1141–1147. doi:
10.1002/cbic.201500035
Higel F, Seidl A, Soergel F, Friess W. 2016. N-glycosylation heterogeneity and the influence on structure, function and pharmacokinetics of monoclonal antibodies and Fc fusion proteins.
Eur J Pharm Biopharm
100
: 94–100. doi:
10.1016/j.ejpb.2016.01.005
Moradali MF, Rehm BHA. 2020. Bacterial biopolymers: from pathogenesis to advanced materials.
Nat Rev Microbiol
18
: 195–210. doi:
10.1038/s41579-019-0313-3
Whitfield C, Wear SS, Sande C. 2020. Assembly of bacterial capsular polysaccharides and exopolysaccharides.
Annu Rev Microbiol
74
: 521–543. doi:
10.1146/annurev-micro-011420-075607

Essentials of Glycobiology, Fourth Edition
4
Cellular Organization of Glycosylation
Karen J. Colley, Ajit Varki, Robert S. Haltiwanger, and Taroh Kinoshita
GLYCOSYLATION IS UNIVERSAL IN LIVING ORGANISMS
TOPOLOGICAL ISSUES IN GLYCAN BIOSYNTHESIS
The ER–Golgi Pathway of Eukaryotes
Donors for Glycosylation Reactions
Nuclear and Cytosolic Glycosylation in Eukaryotes
Glycosylation Reactions at the Plasma Membrane
Glycosylation Pathways in Eubacteria and Archaea
GLYCOSYLATION IN THE EUKARYOTIC SECRETORY PATHWAY
Many Golgi Enzymes Share a Similar Topology
Localization of Glycosylation Enzymes in Golgi Compartments
GLYCOSYLATION IN UNEXPECTED SUBCELLULAR LOCATIONS
TURNOVER AND RECYCLING OF GLYCANS
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
FURTHER READING
T
his chapter provides an overview of glycosylation from the perspective of a single cell, taking into account the patterns of expression, topology, and other features of the biosynthetic and degradative enzymes that are common to most cell types. The focus is mostly on the organization of glycosylation in eukaryotic cells.
Chapters 21
and
22
further address prokaryotic glycosylation mechanisms.
GLYCOSYLATION IS UNIVERSAL IN LIVING ORGANISMS
After more than three billion years of evolution, every free-living cell and every cell type within eukaryotic organisms remains covered with a dense and complex layer of glycans (
Chapter 20
). Even enveloped viruses that bud from infected cells carry with them the glycosylation patterns of the host. Additionally, most secreted molecules are glycosylated and extracellular matrices of multicellular organisms are rich in glycans and glycoconjugates. Matrices secreted by unicellular organisms when they congregate (e.g., bacterial biofilms [
Chapter 21
]) also contain glycans. Thus, evolution has repeatedly and consistently selected glycans as being the most diverse and flexible molecules to position at the interface between cells and the extracellular milieu. Possible reasons include their relative hydrophilicity, flexibility, and mobility in aqueous environments and their extreme diversity, allowing facile short-term and long-term adaptations to changing environments and pathogen regimes.
In bacteria, Archaea, and fungi, glycans serve critical structural roles in the cell wall and in resisting large differences in osmolarity between cytoplasm and environment. In eukaryotes, both secretory proteins and membrane proteins typically pass through an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)–Golgi pathway, the cellular system in which many major glycosylation reactions occur (see below). Most proteins in the blood plasma of animals (with the exception of albumin) are also heavily glycosylated, and the glycosylation of these and other secreted proteins may provide solubility, hydrophilicity, and negative charge, thus reducing unwanted intermolecular interactions and protecting against proteolysis. Cell-surface membrane proteins like receptors, adhesion molecules, and channels are typically glycosylated, and this modification can promote their proper folding, ensure their stability, and impact function.
TOPOLOGICAL ISSUES IN GLYCAN BIOSYNTHESIS
The ER–Golgi Pathway of Eukaryotes
The classic work of George Palade indicated that most cell-surface and secreted proteins in eukaryotic cells are cotranslationally translocated into the ER where they are folded, modified, and subjected to quality control mechanisms. They then make their way via an intermediate compartment (IC) through multiple stacks of the Golgi apparatus, finally being distributed to various destinations from the
trans
-Golgi network (TGN). Secretory pathway proteins can be N-glycosylated, O-glycosylated, and/or modified with glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchors, and some called proteoglycans are modified with attached glycosaminoglycan chains. The enzymes involved in each of these modification pathways are distinct. N-linked glycans and GPI anchors are preassembled before being transferred to proteins and then further modified in the ER–Golgi pathway. The stepwise assembly of O-linked glycans and glycosaminoglycans, as well as the glycosylation of lipids, involve reactions in both the ER and Golgi (
Chapters 9
–
13
and 17).
Figure 4.1
superficially depicts some steps in the synthesis of the major glycan classes in the ER–Golgi pathway of animal cells.
FIGURE 4.1.
Initiation and maturation of the major types of eukaryotic glycoconjugates in relation to subcellular trafficking in the ER–Golgi–plasma membrane pathway. This illustration outlines the different mechanisms and topology for initiation, trimming, and elongation of the major glycan classes in animal cells.
Asterisks
represent the addition of outer sugars to glycans in the Golgi apparatus. N-Glycans and glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchors are initiated by the en bloc transfer of a large preformed precursor glycan to a newly synthesized glycoprotein. O-glycans and sulfated glycosaminoglycans are initiated by the addition of a single monosaccharide to a serine or threonine in the case of O-glycans or to specific tetrasaccharide linkers in the case of sulfated glycosaminoglycans, followed by extension. The most common glycosphingolipids are initiated by the addition of glucose to ceramide on the outer face of the ER–Golgi compartments, and the glycan is then flipped into the lumen to be extended. For a better understanding of the events depicted in this figure, see details in other chapters of this book: N-glycans (
Chapter 9
); O-glycans (
Chapters 10
and
13
); glycosphingolipids (
Chapter 11
); GPI anchors (
Chapter 12
); and sulfated glycosaminoglycans (
Chapter 17
).
In the ER–Golgi pathway, some glycan chains are made on the cytoplasmic face of intracellular membranes and flipped across to the other side, but most are added to the growing chain on the
inside
of the ER or the Golgi (
Figure 4.1
). Regardless, the portion of a molecule that faces the inside of the lumen of the ER or Golgi will ultimately face the
outside
of the cell or the inside of a secretory granule or lysosome. To date, there are no well-documented exceptions to this topological rule. Of course, these topological considerations are reversed for nuclear and cytoplasmic glycosylation (see below), because the active sites of the relevant glycosyltransferases for these reactions face the cytoplasm. Not surprisingly then, the types of glycans found on the two sides of the cell membrane so far appear to be distinct from each other. Some “leaderless secretory proteins” destined for the extracellular space never enter the ER lumen, but are instead transferred directly through the plasma membrane, by as yet poorly defined mechanisms, including cytokines such as IL-1β and IL-18, growth factors such as fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2), and galectins. Interestingly, many of these proteins have glycan binding properties, which would presumably cause problems if they instead traversed the glycan rich ER–Golgi pathway.
Donors for Glycosylation Reactions
Regardless of location, most glycosylation reactions use activated forms of monosaccharides (often nucleotide sugars and in some cases lipid-phosphate-linked sugars, such as dolichol phosphate mannose) as donors for glycosyltransferases (see
Chapter 5
for a listing of some enzymes, their donors and corresponding transporters, and details about their biochemistry). A variety of glycan modifications also occur in nature (
Chapter 6
). Of these, the most common are generated by sulfotransferases, acetyltransferases, and methyltransferases, which use activated forms of sulfate (3′-phosphoadenyl-5′-phosphosulfate; PAPS), acetate (acetyl-CoA), and methyl groups (
S
-adenosylmethionine; AdoMet), respectively. Almost all donors for glycosylation reactions and glycan modifications are synthesized within the cytosolic compartment, from precursors of endogenous origin. In eukaryotes, most of these donors are actively transported across a membrane bilayer by specific multipass transporter proteins, becoming available for reactions within the lumen of the ER–Golgi pathway.
Nuclear and Cytosolic Glycosylation in Eukaryotes
For many years, the nucleus and cytosol (which are topologically semicontinuous via nuclear pores) were assumed to be devoid of glycosylation capacity. It is now established that distinct glycoconjugates are synthesized and reside within these compartments. Indeed, one of them
(O-linked GlcNAc;
Chapter 19
) may well be quantitatively the most common type of glycoconjugate in many cells. Both the O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT) responsible for synthesizing O-linked GlcNAc on nuclear and cytosolic proteins and the O-GlcNAcase (OGA) that removes this monosaccharide are soluble proteins in these compartments. In addition, select cytosolic proteins can be modified with O-Glc, O-Fuc, or O-Man (
Chapters 18
and
19
).
Glycosylation Reactions at the Plasma Membrane
Because prokaryotic cells do not have an ER–Golgi pathway, they typically generate their cell-surface glycans at the interface of the cytoplasmic membrane and the cytoplasm or in the periplasm (see below). Other glycoconjugates like hyaluronan in vertebrate cells, chitin in invertebrate cells, and cellulose in plant cells are synthesized on the cytoplasmic face of the plasma membrane and simultaneously extruded across the membrane to the outside (
Chapters 16
,
24
, and
26
). The enzymes involved in the synthesis of these glycoconjugates appear to mediate this extrusion. Typical eukaryotic Golgi glycosylation enzymes have also been found at the cell surface or as soluble forms in the extracellular space, as described below. Whether these glycosyltransferases would routinely have adequate supplies of nucleotide sugar donors to modify cell-surface glycans is unclear, but at least one example has been documented (see below). On the other hand, there are examples of remodeling of cell-surface glycans in animal cells—for example, the endosulfatases (Sulf enzymes) that modify heparan sulfate glycosaminoglycan (
Chapter 17
) and endogenous sialidases that remove cell-surface sialic acids (
Chapter 15
). Some protozoan parasites, such as trypanosomes, transfer sialic acids from host glycoconjugates to their cell-surface glycans using
trans
-sialidases (
Chapter 43
).
Glycosylation Pathways in Eubacteria and Archaea
Prokaryotic assembly pathways of polysaccharides and oligosaccharides are very similar to pathways found in the ER and the plasma membrane of eukaryotes. They are assembled in the cytoplasm and then translocated across the plasma membrane. For many biosynthetic pathways, such as O-antigen biosynthesis in Gram-negative bacteria, N-linked protein glycosylation in Archaea, and some Gram-negative bacteria or S-layer biosynthesis in Gram-positive bacteria, oligosaccharides are assembled on lipid carriers at the inner site of the plasma membrane and then flipped to the periplasmic site (
Chapters 21
and
22
). Synthesis of oligosaccharides can continue in the periplasm, but for these reactions, isoprenoid-linked monosaccharides serve as activated substrates as is the case in cell wall biogenesis of actinobacteria (mycobacteria) (
Chapter 21
).
GLYCOSYLATION IN THE EUKARYOTIC SECRETORY PATHWAY
Much effort has gone into understanding the mechanisms of glycosylation and glycan modification within the ER and the Golgi apparatus, and it is clear that a variety of interacting and competing factors determine the final outcome of the reactions. The glycosyltransferases and processing glycosidases are well-studied (
Chapter 6
), and their location has helped to define various functional compartments of the ER–Golgi pathway.
Many Golgi Enzymes Share a Similar Topology
Despite lack of sequence homology among different glycosyltransferase families, most Golgi enzymes share some features. Early studies of vertebrate glycosyltransferases found some of these activities in soluble form in secretions and body fluids; others were identified as
membrane-bound activities within cells, and some showed both properties. Subsequent molecular cloning defined the sequences of Golgi glycosyltransferases, revealing that they share a common topology and domain structure that can account for these observations.
The majority of Golgi glycosylation enzymes are type II membrane proteins consisting of three parts: an amino-terminal cytoplasmic tail, followed by a transmembrane (TM) region that also acts as an uncleavable signal sequence, and a large carboxy-terminal region containing a membrane-proximal, proteolytically sensitive stem region as well as a large catalytic domain. The type II topology of these Golgi enzymes places their catalytic sequences in the Golgi lumen, where they participate in the synthesis of the glycan chains on proteins and lipids during their transit through the secretory pathway (
Figure 4.2
).
FIGURE 4.2.
Topology and localization of Golgi glycosylation enzymes. Golgi glycosyltransferases and glycosidases are type II membrane proteins with their catalytic sequences facing the lumen of the Golgi. According to the cisternal maturation model of
intra
-Golgi transport, these glycosylation enzymes are maintained in the Golgi and segregated into different cisternae via continuous retrograde transport in COPI-coated vesicles. Their incorporation into these vesicles is likely mediated by the interaction between sequences in their cytoplasmic tails and proteins associated with the coated vesicles. For example, two select COPI coatomer subunits have been demonstrated to bind to a specific sequence motif in the amino-terminal cytoplasmic tails of a number of Golgi glycosylation enzymes. Mutations in this motif in the GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase enzyme that modifies lysosomal enzymes lead to its mislocation, resulting in the lysosomal storage disease, mucolipidosis III (
Chapter 33
). The selective partitioning of glycosylation enzymes into membranes also plays a role in their Golgi localization. Differences in transmembrane (TM) length and hydrophobicity allows the selective partitioning of these enzymes into different compartments with low cholesterol content (thinner membranes) or high cholesterol content (wider membranes). In general, the relatively short TM regions of these enzymes may prevent their partitioning into post-Golgi transport compartments that share the wider, cholesterol-rich membrane found on the cell surface. The dimerization and hetero-oligomerization of Golgi glycosylation enzymes, mediated by their luminal sequences, can also be important for enzyme localization and efficient glycosylation in some pathways. The Golgi localization of these enzymes is not always absolute, and some are found on the cell surface or are cleaved within their proteolytically sensitive stem region by proteases in late Golgi or post-Golgi compartments and secreted into the extracellular space (not shown). (IC) intermediate compartment; (TGN)
trans
-Golgi network.
Many Golgi enzymes are secreted by cells, sometimes in large quantities, and can be found in cell culture supernatants and various body fluids. These soluble, secreted enzymes are derived from their membrane-associated forms by one or more proteolytic cleavage events that occur within the enzyme's stem region (
Figure 4.2
). These cleavage events are catalyzed by proteases in the
trans
regions of the Golgi and in post-Golgi compartments. The production of soluble enzymes from cell types such as hepatocytes and endothelium can be dramatically up-regulated under inflammatory conditions. Because circulating and cell-surface localized glycosyltransferases are not expected to have access to adequate concentrations of donor nucleotide sugars (primarily located inside cells), it was thought that they should be functionally incapable of performing transfer reactions in extracellular spaces. However, recent evidence suggests that the release of nucleotide sugar donors by activated platelets may allow soluble, secreted sialyltransferase ST6Gal-I to modify glycans on cell surfaces beyond the original source of the enzyme.
Not all glycosylation enzymes in the secretory pathway are type II membrane proteins. For example, the UDP-GlcNAc:lysosomal enzyme N-acetylglucosamine-1-phosphotransferase (GlcNAc-phosphotransferase) is a multisubunit complex and the GlcNAc-1-phosphodiester α-N-acetylglucosaminidase is a type I membrane protein with its amino terminus in the lumen of the Golgi. These enzymes are involved in the synthesis of the Man-6-P targeting signal of newly synthesized lysosomal hydrolases (see
Chapter 33
). Some ER glycosylation enzymes are synthesized as soluble proteins. These include the UDP-glucose glycoprotein glucosyltransferase (UGGT) involved in ER quality control (
Chapter 39
), and enzymes involved in epidermal growth factor (EGF) repeat or thrombospondin type 1 repeat (TSR) glycosylation such as the two protein O-fucosyltransferases, POFUT1 (EGF-like repeats) and 2 (TSR), protein O-glucosyltransferases 1, 2, and 3 (POGLUT1-3; EGF-like repeats), EGF-specific O-GlcNAc transferase (EOGT; EGF-like repeats), and β1-3-glucosyltransferase (B3GLCT; TSR) (
Chapter 13
). In addition, one of the sulfotransferases involved in heparan sulfate synthesis, GlcNAc 3-O-sulfotransferase 1, is a soluble enzyme in the Golgi.
Localization of Glycosylation Enzymes in Golgi Compartments
All forms of glycosylation in the secretory pathway are highly ordered and sequential processes, typically involving glycosyltransferase reactions. These enzymes, their glycan substrates (attached to protein or lipid), and the appropriate nucleotide sugar donor must be located in the same compartment. Biochemical and ultrastructural studies indicate that glycosyltransferases segregate into distinct overlapping compartments within the secretory pathway. Generally speaking, enzymes acting early in the biosynthetic pathway localize to
cis
- and
medial
-Golgi compartments, whereas those acting later in the pathway tend to localize in the
trans
-Golgi cisternae and the TGN. These observations prompted extensive exploration of mechanisms whereby glycosyltransferases and processing glycosidases achieve this compartmental segregation. Early studies were directed at identifying enzyme sequences required for their retention in the Golgi cisternae per the vesicular transport model of protein trafficking, whereas more recent studies have included the framework of the cisternal maturation model (see below).
The view of how proteins traverse the Golgi stack and how Golgi enzymes “retain” their relative positions in the Golgi cisternae has evolved substantially and includes the two primary models mentioned above, which are not mutually exclusive and may function together in cells. The vesicular transport model posits that the Golgi is a stable compartment, and that cargo proteins are transported in coated vesicles from the ER to an intermediate compartment and between each Golgi cisterna in a vectorial fashion, during which time these proteins are modified by Golgi glycosylation enzymes retained in each cisterna. More recent data support a cisternal maturation model that can explain the intra-Golgi transport of larger cargo molecules, which cannot fit into small transport vesicles (
Figure 4.2
). In this model, a new Golgi cisterna is formed on the
cis
face of the stack by the transport of cargo molecules in COPII-coated vesicles from the ER to an intermediate compartment, and the retrograde transport of
cis-
Golgi enzymes in COPI-coated vesicles from an “older”
cis
cisterna into the newly formed compartment that then becomes the
cis
cisterna. The cisterna and its cargo mature as later Golgi glycosylation enzymes are sequentially transported into the “younger” cisternae. The cisternae progress and mature until they effectively dissolve at the TGN stage as membrane and cargo are transported to the plasma membrane for residence or constitutive secretion, to secretory granules for regulated secretion, or to the endosome/lysosome system. The cisternal maturation model is thus distinct from the vesicular transport model in that Golgi enzymes are not retained in stable compartments but continuously transported in a retrograde fashion to “mature” younger cisternae and their cargo.
The role of the cisternal maturation in Golgi enzyme localization is supported by observations that mutations in conserved oligomeric Golgi (COG) complex proteins involved in retrograde vesicular transport impact Golgi enzyme distribution and overall protein glycosylation. The COG complex is a hetero-oligomer of eight subunits that is believed to function as a cytoplasmic tethering complex that links incoming vesicles to their target compartments before vesicle fusion. This complex is thought to cooperate with COPI subunits in retrograde vesicular transport related to intra-Golgi and Golgi-to-ER trafficking. Mutations in COG subunits lead to the instability and/or mislocalization of several Golgi glycosyltransferases across the stack and to corresponding glycosylation defects. The COG complex does not directly interact with Golgi enzymes, but it is critical for retrograde vesicular transport in the Golgi system and in this way impacts overall Golgi structure and thus ensures efficient glycosylation. Notably, several congenital disorders of glycosylation type II (CDG-II) are the result of mutations in COG subunits (
Chapter 45
).
Studies using mutant and chimeric Golgi enzymes showed that different enzymes have different requirements for their localization. Early work pointed to the TM regions of enzymes such as the GlcNAcT-1 (
medial
-Golgi), GalT-1 (
trans
-Golgi), and ST6Gal-I (
trans
-Golgi and TGN), but later studies revealed that for many enzymes, multiple signals and mechanisms are responsible. The role of both homo- and hetero-oligomerization in the localization of some Golgi enzymes has been established. In addition, substantial evidence supports the role of glycosyltransferase cytoplasmic tails in enzyme retrograde transport and Golgi localization (see below).
The length and hydrophobicity of a membrane protein's TM region determine its ability to partition into membrane microdomains and are now appreciated to be involved in membrane protein trafficking and localization throughout the cell. Both the concentration of cholesterol and the width of the membrane increase throughout the secretory pathway with the widest, most cholesterol-rich membranes found at the cell surface. Experiments using cholesterol-containing model membranes showed that shorter TM peptides partition into thinner membranes, whereas longer TM peptides partition into thicker membranes. It is possible that cholesterol's tendency to “straighten” the lipid acyl chains may make it more energetically difficult to partition TM peptides into membranes with mismatched thicknesses. In support of the idea that membrane thickness may contribute to membrane protein localization in the secretory pathway, it has been noted that ER proteins have shorter TM regions than plasma membrane proteins, and that the TM regions of Golgi enzymes are intermediate between those of ER and plasma membrane proteins. However, among the Golgi enzymes there is not a strict increase in TM length as one moves from the
cis
to the
trans
face of the organelle. One possibility is that the relative impact of TM region length on cisternal localization depends on what other sequences and mechanisms are involved in the localization of a specific enzyme. Nevertheless, at minimum, the shorter TM regions of Golgi enzymes may prevent these proteins from leaving the Golgi system by reducing their ability to partition to the thicker, cholesterol-rich membranes of carriers destined for post-Golgi compartments like the plasma membrane (
Figure 4.2
).
Another mechanism contributing to Golgi localization of enzymes is their ability to form oligomeric complexes (
Figure 4.2
). Nearly all enzymes in the N-linked and O-linked glycosylation pathways form homodimers, and many also form heteromeric complexes. In some cases, heteromeric complex formation is pH dependent. Heteromeric complex formation is observed between enzymes that catalyze sequential reactions in the same pathway and that are localized in the same cisternae. For example, in the N-glycosylation pathway, complexes are formed between two N-acetylglucosaminyltransferases (GlcNAcT-I and GlcNAcT-II) in the
medial
-Golgi and between GalT-I and ST6Gal-I in the
trans-
Golgi. Notably, enzymes not in the same pathway (e.g., O-glycosylation and N-glycosylation enzymes) and enzymes in the same pathway, but that catalyze competing or nonsequential events, do not form heteromeric complexes even if they are localized in the same cisterna. Complexes between sequential enzymes in a pathway could increase the efficiency of glycosylation by promoting substrate channeling, wherein one enzyme hands the newly modified substrate off to the next enzyme in the pathway.
Taken together, evidence indicates that glycosylation enzymes use multiple mechanisms to maintain their Golgi localization. The number of signals and mechanisms used by an enzyme could determine how stable its Golgi localization is, whether it is able to move to a later compartment, and whether it is cleaved and secreted into the extracellular space.
GLYCOSYLATION IN UNEXPECTED SUBCELLULAR LOCATIONS
There are scattered reports of glycosylation in unexpected locations—for example, gangliosides in mitochondria and GAGs and N-glycans in the nucleus. Many of these claims are based on incomplete evidence (
Chapter 18
). One possibility is that there are indeed glycans in these unexpected locations, but that their true structures are novel. Conversely, although structural evidence might be strong, there may be inadequate evidence to be certain about the topology of the claimed structures. Regardless, past experience tells us that the cell biology of glycosylation can hold many surprises, and dogmatic positions about such controversial issues are not warranted.
TURNOVER AND RECYCLING OF GLYCANS
Like all components of living cells, glycans constantly turn over. Some glycoconjugates, such as transmembrane heparan sulfate proteoglycans, turn over by shedding from the cell surface through limited proteolysis. Most glycoconjugate turnover occurs by endocytosis and subsequent degradation in lysosomes (
Chapter 44
). Endoglycosidases can initially cleave glycans internally, producing substrates for exoglycosidases in the lysosome. Once broken down, individual monosaccharides are then typically exported from the lysosome into the cytoplasm, so that they can be reused (Figure 1.8,
Chapter 1
). In contrast to the relatively slow turnover of glycans derived from the ER–Golgi pathway, glycans of the nucleus and cytoplasm may be more dynamic and rapidly turned over (
Chapters 18
and
19
). Glycans in bacterial cells (especially those in the cell wall) also turn over during cell division when the cell wall undergoes cleavage and remodeling.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors acknowledge contributions to previous versions of this chapter by Jeffrey D. Esko and appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from James H. Prestegard.
FURTHER READING
Paulson JC, Colley KJ. 1989. Glycosyltransferases. Structure, localization, and control of cell type–specific glycosylation.
J Biol Chem
264
: 17615–17618. doi:
10.1016/S0021-9258(19)84610-0
Calo D, Kaminski L, Eichler J. 2010. Protein glycosylation in Archaea: sweet and extreme.
Glycobiology
20
: 1065–1076. doi:
10.1093/glycob/cwq055
Dell A, Galadari A, Sastre F, Hitchen P. 2010. Similarities and differences in the glycosylation mechanisms in prokaryotes and eukaryotes.
Int J Microbiol
2010
: 148178. doi:
10.1155/2010/148178
Nothaft H, Szymanski CM. 2010. Protein glycosylation in bacteria: sweeter than ever.
Nat Rev Microbiol
8
: 765–778. doi:
10.1038/nrmicro2383
Banfield DK. 2011. Mechanisms of protein retention in the Golgi.
Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol
3
: a005264. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a005264
Glick BS, Luini A. 2011. Models for Golgi traffic: a critical assessment.
Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol
3
: a005215. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a005215
Reynders E, Foulquier F, Annaert W, Matthijs G. 2011. How Golgi glycosylation meets and needs trafficking: the case of the COG complex.
Glycobiology
21
: 853–863. doi:
10.1093/glycob/cwq179
Varki A. 2011. Evolutionary forces shaping the Golgi glycosylation machinery: why cell surface glycans are universal to living cells.
Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol
3
: a005462. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a005462
Moremen KW, Tiemeyer M, Nairn AV. 2012. Vertebrate protein glycosylation: diversity, synthesis and function.
Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol
13
: 448–462. doi:
10.1038/nrm3383

Essentials of Glycobiology, Fourth Edition
5
Glycosylation Precursors
Hudson H. Freeze, Michael Boyce, Natasha E. Zachara, Gerald W. Hart, and Ronald L. Schnaar
GENERAL PRINCIPLES
EXTERNAL SUGAR SOURCES AND SUGAR TRANSPORTERS
INTRACELLULAR SOURCES OF MONOSACCHARIDES
Salvage
Activation and Interconversion of Monosaccharides
Diverse Monosaccharides in Bacteria and Plants
NUCLEOTIDE SUGAR TRANSPORTERS
CONTROL OF GLYCOSYLATION PRECURSORS
DONORS FOR GLYCAN MODIFICATION
SYNTHESIS OF CARRIER LIPIDS
EMERGING KNOWLEDGE
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
FURTHER READING
I
n nature, most glycans are synthesized by glycosyltransferases, enzymes that transfer activated forms of monosaccharides from nucleotide sugars and lipid-linked sugar intermediates to acceptors, including proteins, lipids, and growing glycan chains. Monosaccharide precursors are imported into the cell, salvaged from degraded glycans, or created enzymatically from other sugars within the cell. In eukaryotic cells, glycosylation occurs mostly in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and Golgi apparatus, whereas monosaccharide activation and interconversions occur mostly in the cytoplasm. Nucleotide sugar–specific transporters carry activated sugar donors into the Golgi and to a lesser extent into the ER. In some cases, nucleotide sugars are used to synthesize activated lipid-linked intermediates before glycan transfer. This chapter describes how cells accomplish these tasks, with an emphasis on animal cells.
GENERAL PRINCIPLES
Glucose and fructose are the major carbon and energy sources for organisms as diverse as yeast and humans. Most organisms can synthesize the other monosaccharides needed for glycan biosynthesis from these sources. Not all of these biosynthetic pathways are equally active in all types of cells. However, there are some general principles. Monosaccharides must be activated to a high-energy donor for use in glycan synthesis. This process requires nucleoside triphosphates (typically UTP or GTP) and a glycosyl-1-P (monosaccharide with a phosphate at the anomeric carbon). They can be activated by a kinase (reaction 1) or generated from a previously synthesized activated nucleotide sugar (reactions 2 and 3):
The most common nucleotide sugar donors in animal cells are shown in
Table 5.1
. Sialic acids and their evolutionary ancestors (prokaryotic nonulosonic acids and Kdo) are the only monosaccharides in animals activated as CMP-mononucleotides. Iduronic acid does not have a nucleotide sugar parent because it is formed by epimerization of glucuronic acid after it is incorporated into glycosaminoglycan (GAG) chains. In some instances, one nucleotide sugar can be formed from another either by direct epimerization (reaction 2 above) or by a nucleotide exchange reaction (reaction 3 above). For example, UDP-Gal is made from UDP-Glc by exchange of Gal-1-P for Glc-1-P.
EXTERNAL SUGAR SOURCES AND SUGAR TRANSPORTERS
Three types of sugar transporters carry sugars across the plasma membrane into cells. First are energy-independent facilitated diffusion transporters, such as the glucose transporter (GLUT) family of hexose transporters found in yeast and most mammalian cells. The genes encoding these proteins are named
SLC2A
(solute carriers 2A). Second are energy-dependent transporters—for example, the sodium-dependent glucose transporters (SGLT; gene names
SLC5A
) in intestinal and kidney epithelial cells. The third type includes transporters that couple ATP-dependent phosphorylation with sugar import. These are found in bacteria (
Chapter 21
) and are not covered in this chapter.
GLUT family transporters were first described in yeast, where at least 18 genes are known. Humans have 14 GLUT homologs. GLUT transporters range in size from ∼40 to 70 kDa and have a similar structure, containing 12 membrane-spanning domains, which is typical of many eukaryotic transporters. The transmembrane domains form a barrel with a small pore for sugar passage. Compared with GLUT1, the other family members have a modest (28%–65%) amino acid identity. There are “sugar transporter signatures” consisting of one or a few
amino acids in specific positions relative to the membrane-spanning domains, but no major transporter motifs.
Typically, the GLUTs have K
m
values for glucose uptake in the 1–20 m
M
range. In yeast, many transport glucose, but others are specific for galactose, fructose, or disaccharides. Most mammalian GLUT proteins transport glucose or fructose with variable efficiency but without fully characterized specificity in physiological contexts. However, GLUT5 primarily transports fructose, and the GLUT called HMIT is a proton-coupled
myo
-inositol transporter. GLUT2 also efficiently transports glucosamine.
Glucose is transported from the gut lumen by the energy-requiring SGLT-1 and is recovered from the kidney filtrates by a related transporter, SGLT-2. The SGLT-type transporters have K
m
values of <1 m
M
for glucose.
GLUT1–5 have different distributions among different mammalian cells and different K
m
values that enable them to respond to the availability of glucose. Although most of the human GLUT members are located on the cell surface, a portion of GLUT4 resides in intracellular vesicles, which are recruited to the cell surface in response to insulin. Following carbohydrate-rich meals, glucose transported by SGLT-1 in the intestine is thought to promote the recruitment of GLUT2 to the apical surface for enhanced glucose uptake.
INTRACELLULAR SOURCES OF MONOSACCHARIDES
Salvage
Monosaccharides can be salvaged from glycans degraded within cells (
Chapter 44
). Most of the degradation occurs at low pH in lysosomes. Salvage pathways have received relatively little attention, but their contribution to glycosylation may be quite substantial. For example, 80% of the radiolabeled
N
-acetylglucosamine from glycoproteins degraded in liver lysosomes is converted into UDP-GlcNAc, and at least one-third is used to synthesize secreted glycoproteins. Also, fibroblasts endocytose labeled glycans and reuse about 50% of the amino sugars for de novo glycoprotein synthesis. Efficient salvage is not limited to GlcNAc. Much of the sialic acid derived from endocytosed extracellular glycans may be reused.
Monosaccharides released by degradation must exit the lysosome. Different lysosomal carriers exist for neutral hexoses (glucose, mannose, and galactose), N-acetylated amino sugars, and acidic sugars; the neutral sugar carrier has a K
m
value of 50–75 m
M
for hexose substrates, but also transports fucose and xylose. The
N
-acetylhexosamine carrier (K
m
∼ 4 m
M
) cannot transport nonacetylated amino sugars. The sialic acid and glucuronic acid carrier (K
m
∼ 300–550 µ
M
) is important because its loss leads to an accumulation of these sugars in the lysosome and secretion into the urine, with genetic mutations resulting in a human lysosomal storage disease (
Chapter 44
). Most monosaccharides that reach the cytoplasm are activated and reused, as described below. However, the uronic acids cannot be reused in animals and are degraded via the pentose phosphate pathway. Mannose released from N-glycan processing or turnover is transported out of the cell by a hexose transporter/exchanger with little or no direct reutilization.
Glycan salvage pathways are clinically exploited to mitigate the impact of certain rare congenital disorders of glycosylation that target sugar biosynthesis or transport (
Chapter 45
). Experimentally, salvage pathways are used to manipulate nucleotide sugar pools, to incorporate glycans with biorthogonal chemical handles (
Chapter 56
), and to generate metabolic glycosyltransferase inhibitors (
Chapter 55
).
Activation and Interconversion of Monosaccharides
Glycogen
Glycogen is an immense molecule that contains up to 100,000 glucose units, arranged in Glcα1–4Glc repeating disaccharides with periodic α1–6Glc branches. It is synthesized on a cytoplasmic protein called glycogenin (
Chapter 18
). Glycogen is the major storage polysaccharide in animal cells, and its synthesis and degradation (glycogenolysis) are highly regulated for energy use. Glycogen is synthesized by the addition of single glucose units from UDP-Glc, and it is degraded by glycogen phosphorylase. This ATP-independent reaction forms glucose-1-P by phosphorolysis of glycogen. This substrate can be used directly to form UDP-Glc or converted to glucose-6-P for further catabolism via glycolysis or direct oxidation via glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase.
Glucose
Glucose is the central monosaccharide in carbohydrate metabolism, and it can be converted directly or indirectly into all other sugars (
Figure 5.1
). Glucose is first converted to glucose-6-P by hexokinase. In the glycolytic pathway, glucose-6-P is converted to fructose-6-P by phosphoglucose isomerase or into glucose-1-P by phosphoglucomutase. Reaction of glucose-1-P
with UTP by the enzyme UDP-glucose pyrophosphorylase forms the high-energy donor UDP-Glc. The UDP-Glc pool is used to synthesize glycogen and other glucose-containing molecules such as glucosylceramide (
Chapter 11
) and dolichol-P-glucose, which is used in the N-linked glycan biosynthetic pathway (
Chapter 9
).
FIGURE 5.1.
Biosynthesis and interconversion of monosaccharides. The relative contributions of each pathway under physiological conditions are unknown. (
Rectangles
) donors; (
ovals
) monosaccharides; (
asterisks
) control points; (Kdn) 2-keto-3-deoxy-D-glycero-D-galactonononic acid; (Dol) dolichol. See Online
Appendix 1B
for full names and designated symbols for monosaccharides.
Glucose-6-phosphate is also the substrate for glucose-6-P dehydrogenase, the entry point for its oxidation via the pentose phosphate pathway that subsequently produces 6-phosphogluconate and then ribose-5-phosphate. These reactions generate nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH), which is needed to maintain proper redox status.
Glucuronic Acid
UDP-GlcA (glucuronic acid) is synthesized directly from UDP-Glc by a two-stage reaction requiring two NAD
+
-dependent oxidations at C-6. UDP-GlcA is used primarily for GAG biosynthesis (
Chapters 16
and
17
), but some N- and O-linked glycans and glycosphingolipids contain glucuronic acid as well. In liver cells, the addition of glucuronic acid to bile acids and xenobiotic compounds (such as drugs and toxins) increases their solubility, and a large class of microsomal glucuronosyltransferases is devoted to these reactions.
Iduronic Acid
Iduronic acid is the C-5 epimer of GlcA, and it is found in GAGs dermatan sulfate, heparan sulfate, and heparin. Iduronic acid is not directly synthesized from a nucleotide sugar donor. Instead, it is generated by epimerization of GlcA following its incorporation into the growing GAG chain (
Chapter 17
).
Xylose
Decarboxylation of UDP-GlcA generates UDP-Xyl, which is used to initiate GAG synthesis (
Figure 5.2
;
Chapter 17
) in vertebrates. Xylose is also found on proteins that have O-glucose modifications in epidermal growth factor (EGF) modules (
Chapter 13
) and on O-mannose-based glycans on α-dystroglycan (
Chapters 13
and
45
), as well as on plant N-glycans. A type II membrane protein performs the decarboxylation reaction using UDP-GlcA transported into the ER or Golgi. In
Caenorhabditis elegans
,
the decarboxylase is called SQV-1, and it colocalizes with the UDP-GlcA transporter (
Chapter 25
). In
Arabidopsis
, another UDP-GlcA decarboxylase also occurs in the cytoplasm, but no ortholog has been identified in animals.
FIGURE 5.2.
Biosynthesis of UDP-xylose and the branched sugar donor UDP-apiose from UDP-GlcA. Xylose is found in animals and plants, whereas apiose is used for plant polysaccharides, such as apiogalacturonan in
Lemna minor
. Note the similarity and overlap in the synthesis of xylose and apiose. The only differences are that the C-3 is removed by an unknown mechanism, and the reduction of the newly formed aldehyde creates the branched sugar donor.
Mannose
Mannose is used for multiple types of glycans (
Chapters 9
,
11
,
12
, and
13
). Guanosine diphosphate mannose (GDP-Man) is the primary activated donor. Its production requires prior synthesis of mannose-6-P and its conversion to mannose-1-P. Two ways to produce mannose-6-P are by direct phosphorylation via hexokinase or conversion of fructose-6-P to mannose-6-P using the enzyme phosphomannose isomerase. In yeast, loss of the latter enzyme is lethal. In humans, loss of this enzyme produces a potentially fatal disease called congenital disorder of glycosylation (CDG) type Ib or MPI-CDG (
Chapter 45
). Phosphomannose isomerase is important because free exogenous mannose is not common in the diet, and this enzyme is the key link between mannose and glucose. Both yeast and human phosphomannose isomerase deficiencies are rescued by providing exogenous mannose (although excess mannose is toxic). Mice lacking phosphomannose isomerase activity die in utero because of an accumulation of Man-6-P that inhibits glycolysis and depletes ATP. In mammals, mannose-6-P is converted to mannose-1-P using phosphomannomutase. Because mannose-6-P and mannose-1-P are both obligate precursors of GDP-Man, failure to make sufficient amounts of either one reduces the formation of GDP-Man, which is a direct donor for lipid-linked oligosaccharides (see below) and a precursor for dolichol-P-mannose, which serves multiple glycosylation pathways.
Mannose-6-P can also condense with phosphoenolpyruvate to form 2-keto-3-deoxy-D-glycero-D-galactonononic acid (Kdn). This molecule is activated with CTP to produce CMP-Kdn and is abundant in fish (e.g., in trout testis and on their sperm), in which it is thought to be important for sperm–egg adhesion.
Fucose
Guanosine diphosphate fucose (GDP-Fuc) can be derived from GDP-Man by the sequential action of two enzymes involving three steps. In the first step, the C-4 hydroxyl group of GDP-Man is oxidized to a ketone (GDP-4-keto-6-deoxy-mannose) by the enzyme GDP-Man 4,6-dehydratase, along with the reduction of NADP
+
to NADPH. The next two reactions are catalyzed by a single polypeptide (GDP-L-Fuc synthase in humans) that has epimerase and reductase activity and is well-conserved from bacteria to mammals. GDP-4-keto-6-deoxymannose is epimerized at C-3 and C-5 to form GDP-4-keto-6-deoxyglucose, which is then reduced with NADPH at C-4 to form GDP-Fuc (
Figure 5.3A
). The first oxidation step is feedback-inhibited by GDP-Fuc. GDP-Fuc can also be synthesized directly from fucose. The first step uses a kinase to make fucose-1-P, which is then converted to GDP-Fuc. Mutant CHO cells that cannot convert GDP-Man to GDP-Fuc form hypofucosylated proteins, but this can be corrected by providing exogenous fucose in the medium. Also, mice genetically deficient in the GDP-Man to GDP-Fuc conversion can be rescued by providing fucose in their food or drinking water. Plasma membrane transporters for sugars other than glucose have been characterized, and fucose transporters may exist as well, although they have not been fully characterized, so their quantitative contribution is not known. As with many monosaccharides other than glucose, free fucose concentration in the blood is in the very low micromolar range.
FIGURE 5.3.
Conversion of activated sugar donors. Steps in the synthesis of (
A
) GDP-Fuc from GDP-Man and (
B
) UDP-Gal from UDP-Glc. Details of the various enzymes are given in the text. GDP-Fuc synthesis by this route is not reversible, whereas the interconversion of UDP-Glc and UDP-Gal is easily reversible.
Galactose
UDP-Gal can be made in a two-step reaction by ATP-dependent phosphorylation of galactose at C-1 (by galactokinase) to form galactose-1-P, which then displaces glucose-1-P in UDP-Glc to form UDP-Gal by the action of galactose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase. A deficiency in this enzyme activity results in a severe human disease called galactosemia, which leads to intellectual disability, liver damage, and eventual death if galactose intake is not controlled (
Chapter 45
). Finally, UDP-Gal can be formed from UDP-Glc by the NAD-dependent reaction catalyzed by UDP-Gal 4-epimerase. The enzyme first converts the C-4 hydroxyl group to a keto derivative forming NADH from bound NAD
+
. In the next step, the keto group is converted back to a hydroxyl group with opposite orientation and NAD
+
reforms (
Figure 5.3B
). In mammals, the same enzyme interconverts UDP-GalNAc and UDP-GlcNAc.
Galactose usually occurs as a pyranose (
p
) ring in “higher” animals, but bacteria and pathogenic eukaryotes, such as
Leishmania
and
Aspergillus,
incorporate galactofuranose (
f
) into their glycans (
Chapter 21
). The donor is formed by conversion of UDP-Gal(
p
)→UDP-Gal(
f
) using a flavin adenine dinucleotide–dependent mutase.
N-Acetylglucosamine
Enzymatic synthesis of uridine diphosphate
N
-acetylglucosamine (UDP-GlcNAc) begins with the formation of glucosamine-6-P from fructose-6-P by transamination using glutamine as the –NH
2
donor by the enzyme glutamine–fructose-6-phosphate transaminase (GFAT). Glucosamine-6-P is then N-acetylated via an acetyl-CoA-mediated reaction to form
N
-acetylglucosamine-6-P and then isomerized to
N
-acetylglucosamine-1-P via a 1,6-bis-phosphate intermediate. Similar to the other activation reactions,
N
-acetylglucosamine-1-P then reacts with UTP to form UDP-GlcNAc and pyrophosphate. Alternatively, GlcNAc can be directly phosphorylated to form
N
-acetylglucosamine-6-P by a kinase that also synthesizes
N
-acetyl-mannosamine-6-P from
N
-acetylmannosamine. Phospho-
N
-acetylglucosamine mutase then converts
N
-acetylglucosamine-6-P to
N
-acetylglucosamine-1-P. This route may account for
the efficient salvage of GlcNAc from lysosomal degradation of glycans. Glucosamine can also be salvaged following sequential phosphorylation and acetylation.
N-Acetylgalactosamine
In animals, UDP-GalNAc can arise from two routes. One is the direct reaction of
N
-acetylgalactosamine-1-P with UTP.
N
-Acetylgalactosamine-1-P is formed by a specific kinase that is distinct from galactose-1-kinase. UDP-GalNAc can also be formed by epimerization of UDP-GlcNAc using the same NAD-dependent epimerase that converts UDP-Glc to UDP-Gal.
Sialic Acids
The sialic acids include three parent compounds—
N
-acetylneuraminic acid (Neu5Ac),
N
-glycolylneuraminic acid (Neu5Gc), and Kdn (
Chapter 15
)—all of which are converted to CMP nucleotide sugars. Generation of cytidine-5′-monophospho-
N
-acetylneuraminic acid (CMP-Neu5Ac) is more complicated than formation of the other activated sugars. First, UDP-GlcNAc is converted to
N
-acetylmannosamine-6-P by bifunctional UDP-N-acetylglucosamine 2-epimerase/N-acetylmannosamine kinase (GNE), a single enzyme with two catalytic activities. The first activity epimerizes the GlcNAc of UDP-GlcNAc at C-2 and cleaves the UDP to yield
N
-acetylmannosamine (ManNAc). In the next reaction, the kinase activity uses ATP to form ManNAc-6-P. Mutations in this enzyme cause two completely distinct metabolic disorders: sialuria and inclusion body myopathy type 2 (
Chapter 45
). Knocking out this gene in mice causes early embryonic lethality. In the next step, ManNAc-6-P is condensed with phosphoenolpyruvate to form
N
-acetylneuraminic acid-9-P. Phosphate is then removed by a phosphatase. Activation with CTP yields CMP-Neu5Ac, which is the target in some organisms for a hydroxylase that converts some of it to CMP-Neu5Gc. For unknown reasons, the last steps occur in the nucleus in vertebrate cells, with subsequent export of the activated precursors to the cytoplasm. Other modifications of sialic acid can occur in the Golgi after transfer of the sialic acid to the oligosaccharide acceptor.
Sialic acids can be salvaged from internal glycoprotein turnover or from plasma and activated by phosphorylation and the addition of CMP from CTP. In addition, GlcNAc can be activated to UDP-GlcNAc and reenter the biosynthetic pathway to CMP-Neu5Ac (
Chapter 15
).
Diverse Monosaccharides in Bacteria and Plants
Fucose is the only deoxyhexose commonly found in animal cell glycans. In contrast, bacterial and plant polysaccharides and glycoproteins frequently contain a variety of deoxysugars, deoxyaminosugars, and branched-chain sugars. These diverse sugars often have potent biological properties. For example, aminoglycoside antibiotics like streptomycin bind to the bacterial ribosome to disrupt protein synthesis. Deoxyhexoses are often immunological determinants of lipopolysaccharides or O-antigens of the
Salmonella
species. Five of the eight possible 3,6-dideoxyhexoses have been found in these organisms at the nonreducing end of the Gram-negative cell wall lipopolysaccharide. Other deoxyhexoses, such as a 4,6-dideoxy-hexose and a 2,3,6-trideoxyhexose, are also biologically significant but so far seem to be uncommon in nature.
Biosynthesis of both deoxysugars and dideoxysugars begins with the oxidation of C-4, similar to the first step of the conversion of GDP-Man to GDP-Fuc. The nucleotide (N) differs for the various sugars, and the individual pathways use different dehydratases. For example, biosynthesis of most 3,6-dideoxyhexoses (except colitose) begins with conversion of CDP-glucose to CDP-4-keto-6-deoxyhexose by NAD
+
-dependent CDP-glucose dehydratase. In the biosynthesis of abequose (3,6-dideoxy-D-xylohexose), the product, CDP-6-deoxy-L-threo-D-glycero-hexulose,
is then converted in two additional steps to CDP-3,6-dideoxy-D-glycero-D-glycero-4-hexulose by a second dehydratase followed by a reductase.
Amino sugars, such as glucosamine, arise from keto sugars by the addition of an amino group from glutamine (
Figure 5.1
). In addition, bacteria and plants have many 6-deoxy-hexoses with amino groups in the 2, 3, or 4 positions. For example, daunosamine is a 3-amino-6-deoxyhexose that is found in the antibiotic daunomycin. Here, TDP-glucose is dehydrated to 3-keto-6-deoxyglucose and the amino group is added via a transamination reaction, probably involving a vitamin B6-dependent reaction.
Plants and bacteria also contain a number of branched-chain sugars. For instance, apiose is a component of the polysaccharide apiogalacturonan of
L. minor
, and strepose is a component of the antibiotic streptomycin, produced by
Streptomyces griseus
. Apiose (
Figure 5.2
) is synthesized from UDP-GlcA via a 4-keto intermediate that can yield UDP-Xyl or UDP-apiose. Apiose synthesis removes carbon 3 from the chain to give the branched sugar by an unknown mechanism. Although the syntheses of other branched-chain sugars have not been delineated, they probably follow similar reaction pathways.
NUCLEOTIDE SUGAR TRANSPORTERS
In eukaryotes, nucleotide sugars are synthesized in the cytoplasm or nucleus, whereas most glycosylation occurs inside the ER or Golgi compartments (exceptions being hyaluronan [
Chapter 16
] and nucleocytoplasmic glycosylation [
Chapters 18
and
19
]). Therefore, newly synthesized nucleotide sugars are on the “wrong” side of the membrane for most glycosylation reactions and so must be transported into the ER and Golgi. Negative charge prevents these donors from simply diffusing into these compartments. To overcome this hurdle, eukaryotic cells have a set of energy-independent nucleotide sugar antiporters that deliver nucleotide sugars into the lumen of these organelles, with the simultaneous exiting of nucleoside monophosphates, most of which must first be generated from the nucleoside diphosphates by a nucleoside diphosphatase (
Figure 5.4
). This transport mechanism was determined biochemically in isolated vesicles and genetically in various mutant cell lines. The K
m
of the transporters ranges from 1 to 10 µ
M
. Using in vitro systems, the transporters have been shown to increase the concentration of the nucleotide sugars within the Golgi lumen by 10- to 50-fold. This is usually sufficient to reach or exceed the calculated K
m
of glycosyltransferases that use these donors.
FIGURE 5.4.
Some known transporters for nucleotide sugars, PAPS (3′-phosphoadenosine-5′-phosphosulfate), and ATP are located in the Golgi membranes of mammals, yeast, protozoa, and plants. These proteins are antiporters and return the corresponding nucleoside monophosphate back to the cytoplasm when the nucleotide sugar is delivered into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) or Golgi compartment. Because most glycosylation reactions produce a nucleoside diphosphate, this requires conversion to the nucleoside monophosphate. For PAPS, the corresponding exiting molecule is unknown, and for ATP, it is AMP, ADP, or both. The phosphate (P
i
) transporter is hypothetical. See Online
Appendix 1B
for full names and designated symbols for monosaccharides.
Most of these antiporters are found in the Golgi, but some are also found in the ER. They are organelle-specific and their location usually corresponds to the location of the relevant glycosyltransferases (
Table 5.2
;
Figure 5.4
). Nucleotide sugar import into the Golgi is not energy-dependent nor affected by ionophores. However, the import is competitively inhibited by the corresponding nucleoside monophosphates and diphosphates in the cytosol but not by the monosaccharides. There are also transporters for ATP and PAPS (3′-phosphoadenosine-5′-phosphosulfate), which are used for carbohydrate and protein sulfation.
TABLE 5.2.
Nucleotide transport in Golgi and ER
Nucleotide
ER
Golgi
CMP-Sia
−
+++
GDP-Fuc
+
++++
UDP-Gal
–
++++
PAPS
–
++++
GDP-Man
–
++++
UDP-GlcNAc
++
++++
UDP-GalNAc
++
++++
UDP-Xyl
++
++++
ATP
+++
++++
UDP-GlcA
++++
++++
UDP-Glc
++++
+
The relative distribution of the nucleotide transporters in ER and Golgi is indicated by the number of plus signs (+). A minus sign (–) indicates that the transporter is not found in that compartment.
ER, Endoplasmic reticulum.
The glucuronidation of bile and xenobiotic compounds in the ER explains the need for UDP-GlcA transporter in the ER of liver cells. The presence of a Golgi transporter is consistent with the location of the glycosyltransferases that use UDP-GlcA for the formation of GAG chains and other classes of glycans. The observation that reglycosylation of misfolded glycoproteins occurs in the ER (
Chapter 39
) explains the need for an ER UDP-Glc transporter. Under stressful conditions, synthesis of lumenal uridine diphosphatase increases to accommodate increased transport of UDP-Glc needed for reglycosylation of misfolded glycoproteins. The existence of UDP-GlcNAc, UDP-GalNAc, and UDP-Xyl transporters in the ER may mean that some reactions thought to occur exclusively in the Golgi may also occur in the ER. A good example is the synthesis of O-fucosylated proteins, such as Notch, in the ER versus fucosylation of N- and O-linked chains in the Golgi (
Chapter 13
). Other, as-yet-undiscovered, glycosylation reactions may also occur in the ER.
Mutations in several nucleotide sugar transporters, UDP-Gal, CMP-Sia, GDP-Fuc, UDP-GlcA/UDP-GalNAc, and UDP-GlcNAc cause human glycosylation disorders (
Chapter 45
), generating incomplete sugar chains. Mutant mammalian cell lines also lack specific nucleotide sugar transporters (e.g., for UDP-Gal or CMP-Sia;
Chapter 49
). However, there is some “leakiness” in such mutants. For instance, loss of the UDP-Gal transporter in the Golgi of mutant MDCK (Madin–Darby canine kidney) cells decreases the synthesis of keratan sulfate and galactosylated glycoproteins and glycolipids, but leaves heparan and chondroitin sulfate unaffected. This is probably because the galactosyltransferases that synthesize the core region tetrasaccharide common to GAG chains have lower K
m
values for their donors (
Chapter 17
).
Many putative transporters were identified by homology in the genomes of mammals,
Drosophila melanogaster
,
C. elegans
, plants, and yeast. Like the plasma membrane GLUT transporters discussed above, all are multimembrane-spanning (type III) proteins, but the level of amino acid identity does not give any clue to the substrate specificity. The UDP-GlcNAc transporters from mammalian cells and yeast are 22% identical, whereas mammalian CMP-Sia, UDP-Gal, and UDP-GlcNAc transporters have 40%–50% identity. Clever domain-swapping experiments show that distinct regions are responsible for functional transport, and engineered chimeric transporters can carry both CMP-Sia and UDP-Gal. Biophysical studies of eukaryotic GDP-mannose and CMP-sialic acid transporters illuminate the structural basis for nucleotide sugar selectivity and membrane lipid interactions in transporter function.
Heterologous expression or rescue of transporter-deficient cell lines can be used to analyze the function of putative transporters. For example, expressing the
C. elegans
gene
SQV-7
in yeast showed that this one protein can transport UDP-GlcA, UDP-GalNAc, and UDP-Gal, whereas mutant alleles cannot transport any of these donors. The human gene
SLC35B4
encodes a bifunctional transporter that recognizes UDP-Xyl and UDP-GlcNAc. Another example is the GDP-Man transporter of
Leishmania,
which can also transport GDP-Fuc and GDP-arabinose. This point illustrates that functional, biochemical analyses are essential; genetic homology is insufficient to infer specificity. Moreover, not all of the potential transport-like genes have been assigned specific physiological substrates.
Theoretically, glycosylation may be controlled in part by regulating the availability of nucleotide sugars within the Golgi, presumably by regulating the transporters. The subcompartmental location (
cis
,
medial
,
trans
) of the transporters in the Golgi is not known nor are the physical relationships of the transporters to the various glycosyltransferases they service. Clearly, a functional Golgi compartment requires both the nucleotide sugar donor and the acceptor with a colocalized transferase. There have been few studies on how the actual glycosylation reactions occur within the Golgi. Is it more like solution chemistry or like solid-state transfers? Are there really “soluble pools” of nucleotide sugars? Dramatic time-lapse videos of green fluorescent protein (GFP)-tagged glycosyltransferases show that the proteins are highly mobile within the Golgi, but there is also physical evidence for multiglycosyltransferase complexes involved in the biosynthesis of N-linked glycans, glycosphingolipids, and heparan sulfate. Many transporters appear to function as homodimers, and the GDP-Man transporter in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
(VRG4) oligomerizes in the ER and appears to be transported to the Golgi by an active process. Also, synthesis of galactosylceramide occurs in the ER and a portion of the UDP-Gal transporter binds specifically to galactosylceramide synthase and is retained in the ER to provide donor substrate (
Chapter 11
).
The discovery of protein O-GlcNAcylation, as well as the enzymes that cycle O-GlcNAc, in mitochondria suggests the presence of nucleotide sugar transporters that bridge the outer and inner mitochondrial membranes to the cytosol. Recent data suggest that a pyrimidine nucleotide carrier is an effective transporter of UDP-GlcNAc.
CONTROL OF GLYCOSYLATION PRECURSORS
Biochemical control of the intracellular concentrations of glycosylation precursors (ultimately nucleotide sugars) is a complex and important area of ongoing research. In some cases, key biosynthetic enzymes are inhibited by their final products. A human genetic disorder called sialuria is a clear example. In this condition, massive amounts of sialic acid (several grams each day) are secreted into the urine, along with various intermediates in the CMP-Sia biosynthetic pathway. Sialuria is caused by mutations in the enzyme responsible for the first step in sialic acid biosynthesis, GNE. Sialuria-causing mutations impair the normal feedback inhibition of GNE by CMP-Sia, the end product of the precursor pathway (
Chapter 45
).
Most glycosylation precursor pools turn over within a matter of minutes. The relevant steady state concentrations of the nucleotide sugars have been difficult to reliably determine. It is especially difficult to measure the concentrations of nucleotide sugar donors at their sites of action, which are often confined to the lumen of the ER or Golgi. In whole-animal studies, the GDP-Fuc pool and fucosylated glycans in the intestine can be regulated by the diet and time of weaning. Considering that resident bacteria in the small intestine participate in the induction of fucosylation pathways in the enterocytes, and that gut bacteria can release and use monosaccharides, dietary manipulation of glycosylation introduces another level of unexplored complexity.
Enzymes within the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway (e.g., GFAT and UDP-N-acetylhexosamine pyrophosphorylase) are often up-regulated in cancer. Altered glycan profiles are well-known markers of tumor progression (
Chapter 47
) and likely result from changes in both nucleotide sugar pools and glycosyltransferases. One factor that may drive up-regulation of hexosamine synthesis in tumors is activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR), which may increase GFAT and other nucleotide sugar metabolic enzymes, as well as glycosyltransferases. This axis linking the UPR to nucleotide sugar metabolism has also been linked to lifespan regulation and cardiac hypertrophy.
DONORS FOR GLYCAN MODIFICATION
Glycans can be modified postsynthetically, imparting additional complexity and biological information. Sulfation, phosphorylation, methylation, pyruvylation, acetylation, succinylation, and acylation have been found, and the corresponding donors are listed in
Table 5.3
. In “lower” eukaryotes and bacteria, pyruvic acid is often found as a 1-carboxyethylidene bridge between two hydroxyl groups on a sugar, such as galactose. Because all of these reactions occur in the Golgi in eukaryotes, there must be carriers or transporters that deliver and orient activated donors for efficient synthesis. As additional modifications of sugar chains made in the ER–Golgi
pathway are uncovered, they will likely turn out to require specific transporters to carry the activated donors into the lumen of these compartments.
TABLE 5.3.
Donors for glycan modifications
Modification
Precursor
Transporter
Phosphate
ATP (?)
yes
Sulfate
PAPS
yes
Methyl
S
-adenosylmethionine
?
Acetyl
acetyl-CoA
yes
Pyruvate
phosphoenolpyruvate
?
Acyl
acyl-CoA (?)
?
Succinyl
succinyl-CoA (?)
?
PAPS, 3′-Phosphoadenosine-5′-phosphosulfate.
SYNTHESIS OF CARRIER LIPIDS
Multiple glycosylation pathways in prokaryotes and eukaryotes require lipid carriers to present monosaccharides and oligosaccharides at the proper location. Undecaprenyl-P (bactoprenol) is the glycosyl carrier for O-antigen, peptidoglycan, capsular polysaccharides, teichoic acid, and mannans in bacteria (
Chapter 21
). Dolichol-P serves an analogous function in eukaryotic cells (
Chapter 9
). Dolichol-P-mannose provides all of the mannose for glycophospholipid anchors, C-mannosylated proteins, O-mannose-based chains, and four of the mannose residues of the precursor oligosaccharide used for N-glycan biosynthesis. Dolichol-P-glucose provides glucose for the mature N-linked glycan precursor Glc
3
Man
9
GlcNAc
2
, which itself is built on dolichol pyrophosphate (dolichol-PP).
The formation of dolichol-P involves elongation of farnesyl pyrophosphate with multiple
cis
-isopentenyl pyrophosphate units. The total number of isoprene units can vary, from typically 11 in bacteria (making a C
55
bactoprenol chain) to up to 21 in mammals. In eukaryotes, the double bond nearest the pyrophosphate must be reduced for the carrier to be functional in glycosylation. Studies in yeast, mice, and humans indicate that direct reduction of polyprenol to dolichol is a major pathway, but an alternate pathway must also exist. It is unclear whether the phosphates are removed before or after the reduction step. The evolutionary significance of the different chain lengths and reduction of the double bond is not known. Dolichol is phosphorylated by an ATP-dependent dolichol kinase to generate dolichol-P as needed. Because dolichol, dolichol-P, and dolichol-PP are all generated from a common metabolically stable pool, they must be recycled and interconverted as needed. Dolichol occurs in the ER and Golgi and turns over very slowly.
EMERGING KNOWLEDGE
The finding that disruptions in nucleotide sugar metabolism underpin disease resulted in an influx of data, expanding our knowledge of the signaling pathways controlling nucleotide sugar flux, highlighting noncanonical roles for nucleotide sugars, and identifying new drugs for modulating metabolism. The map of biosynthetic and signaling pathways regulating nucleotide sugars is incomplete, especially with respect to tissue specificity, development, nutrient availability, and stress. New approaches to study metabolic flux and assess or modulate nucleotide sugar levels in an organelle- or cell-specific manner, as well as structural insight into nucleotide sugar transporters and glycosyltransferases, are providing more clarity. Innovations in isotopic labeling of metabolites, mass spectrometry methods, genetic and chemical biosensors of nucleotide sugars, and cryo-electron microscopy hold great promise in this area.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors acknowledge contributions to previous versions of this chapter by the late Alan Elbein and appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from Dirk J. Lefeber and Stephan von Gunten.
FURTHER READING
Leloir LF. 1970. Two decades of research on the biosynthesis of saccharides.
Nobel Lecture
.
http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/chemistry/laureates/1970/leloir-lecture.pdf
Kresge N, Simoni RD, Hill RL. 2005. Luis F. Leloir and the biosynthesis of saccharides.
J Biol Chem
280
: 158–160. doi:
10.1016/s0021-9258(20)67598-6
Park D, Ryu KS, Choi D, Kwak J, Park C. 2007. Characterization and role of fucose mutarotase in mammalian cells.
Glycobiology
17
: 955–962. doi:
10.1093/glycob/cwm066
Holden HM, Cook PD, Thoden JB. 2010. Biosynthetic enzymes of unusual microbial sugars.
Curr Opin Struct Biol
20
: 543–550. doi:
10.1016/j.sbi.2010.08.002
Bar-Peled M, O'Neill MA. 2011. Plant nucleotide sugar formation, interconversion, and salvage by sugar recycling.
Annu Rev Plant Biol
62
: 127–155. doi:
10.1146/annurev-arplant-042110-103918
Freeze HH, Ng BG. 2011. Golgi glycosylation and human inherited diseases.
Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol
3
: a005371. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a005371
Sharma V, Ichikawa M, Freeze HH. 2014. Mannose metabolism: more than meets the eye.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun
453
: 220–228. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.06.021
Yonekawa T, Malicdan MC, Cho A, Hayashi YK, Nonaka I, Mine T, Yamamoto T, Nishino I, Noguchi S. 2014. Sialyllactose ameliorates myopathic phenotypes in symptomatic GNE myopathy model mice.
Brain
137
: 2670–2679. doi:
10.1093/brain/awu210
Chen LQ, Cheung LS, Feng L, Tanner W, Frommer WB. 2015. Transport of sugars.
Annu Rev Biochem
84
: 865–894. doi:
10.1146/annurev-biochem-060614-033904

Essentials of Glycobiology, Fourth Edition
6
Glycosyltransferases and Glycan-Processing Enzymes
James M. Rini, Kelley W. Moremen, Benjamin G. Davis, and Jeffrey D. Esko
GENERAL PROPERTIES
GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASE SPECIFICITY
GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASES THAT RECOGNIZE THE PROTEIN MOIETY OF THEIR ACCEPTOR SUBSTRATES
GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASE SEQUENCE FAMILIES AND FOLD TYPES
GLYCOSIDASES
CATALYTIC AND KINETIC MECHANISMS
SULFATION AND OTHER MODIFICATIONS
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
FURTHER READING
G
lycosyltransferases and glycosidases are responsible for the assembly, processing, and turnover of glycans. In addition, there are a number of transferases that modify glycans by the addition of acetyl, methyl, phosphate, sulfate, and other groups. This chapter covers the general characteristics of enzymes involved in glycan initiation, assembly, and processing, including aspects of substrate specificity, primary sequence relationships, structures, and enzyme mechanisms.
GENERAL PROPERTIES
The biosynthesis of glycans is primarily determined by glycosyltransferases that assemble monosaccharide moieties into linear and branched glycan chains. As might be expected from the complex array of glycan structures found in nature, glycosyltransferases constitute a very large family of enzymes. In many cases, they catalyze a group-transfer reaction in which the monosaccharide moiety of a simple nucleotide sugar donor (electrophile) substrate (e.g., UDP-Gal, GDP-Fuc, or CMP-Sia;
Chapter 5
) is transferred to the acceptor (nucleophile) substrate. In some instances, the donor substrates contain a lipid moiety, such as dolichol-phosphate, linked to mannose or glucose. For other glycosyltransferases, the donor substrate is dolichol-pyrophosphate, linked to an oligosaccharide, and in these cases the entire oligosaccharide is
transferred en bloc to the acceptor substrate (
Chapter 9
). Similarly, other lipid-linked sugars serve as donor substrates for bacterial glycosyltransferases involved in the assembly of peptidoglycan (e.g., GlcNAc-MurNAc(pentapeptide)-undecaprenyl pyrophosphate), lipopolysaccharide, and capsules (
Chapters 21
and
22
).
Glycosyltransferases that use monosaccharides, oligosaccharides, proteins, lipids, small organic molecules, and DNA as acceptor substrates have been characterized (activity to RNA has also been suggested), but only glycosyltransferases involved in the biosynthesis of glycoproteins, proteoglycans, and glycolipids are discussed in this chapter. Among these enzymes, the vast majority is responsible for elongating the glycan moieties of these glycoconjugates; the remainder is responsible for the transfer of either a mono- or oligosaccharide directly to the polypeptide or lipid. Generally speaking, the enzymes that elongate glycans act sequentially so that the product of one enzyme yields a preferred acceptor substrate for the subsequent action of another. The end result is a linear and/or branched structure composed of monosaccharides linked to one another. Acceptor recognition by these glycan-elongating glycosyltransferases does not typically involve the polypeptide or lipid moiety of the acceptor substrate when it exists, although there are several notable exceptions as discussed below.
Glycosidases that remove monosaccharides to form intermediates that are then acted on by glycosyltransferases also play a role in the biosynthesis of some glycan types. These are to be contrasted with glycosidases that are involved in the degradation of glycans (e.g., in lysosomes [
Chapter 44
]). In addition, glycans can be modified by many other enzyme types, including sulfotransferases, phosphotransferases, O-acetyltransferases, O-methyltransferases, pyruvyltransferases, and phosphoethanolamine transferases.
GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASE SPECIFICITY
Most glycosyltransferases show a high degree of specificity for both their donor and acceptor substrates, and this led Saul Roseman and coworkers to advance the “one enzyme–one linkage” hypothesis. The human B blood group α1-3 galactosyltransferase exemplifies this concept. This enzyme catalyzes a glycosylation reaction in which galactose is added in α-linkage to the C-3 hydroxyl group of a galactose residue on the acceptor substrate (
Figure 6.1
). However, the enzyme only acts on galactose modified by fucose in α1-2-linkage and prior modification by other monosaccharides, such as α2-6-linked sialic acid, yields a glycan that is not a substrate (
Figure 6.1
).
FIGURE 6.1.
The strict acceptor substrate specificity of glycosyltransferases is illustrated by the human B blood group α1-3 galactosyltransferase. The B transferase adds galactose in α1-3-linkage to the H antigen (
top middle
) to form the B antigen (
top right
). This enzyme requires the α1-2-linked fucose modification of the H antigen for activity because the B transferase does not add to an unmodified type-2 precursor (
top left
) or precursors modified by sialyl residues (
bottom
) or other monosaccharides (not shown). (For the monosaccharide symbol code, see
Figure 1.5
.)
We now know that there are instances in which more than one glycosyltransferase can use the same acceptor to make the same linkage. The human fucosyltransferases III–VII, for example, all attach fucose in α1-3-linkage to
N
-acetyllactosamine moieties on glycans (
Chapter 14
). Examples of relaxed acceptor specificity are provided by the α2-3 sialyltransferases and β1-4 galactosyltransferases that act broadly on β-linked galactose and
N
-acetylglucosamine, respectively. In some rare cases, a single enzyme can catalyze more than one reaction. Human fucosyltransferase III can attach fucose in either α1-3- or α1-4-linkage, and an enzyme called EXTL2 can attach either
N
-acetylgalactosamine or
N
-acetylglucosamine in α-linkage to glucuronic acid (
Chapter 17
). The β1-4 galactosyltransferase involved in
N
-acetyllactosamine formation shows an unusual flexibility in specificity. When β1-4 galactosyltransferase binds α-lactalbumin (the complex is called lactose synthase), it switches its acceptor specificity from
N
-acetylglucosamine to glucose, which enables the synthesis of lactose and other oligosaccharides during milk production (
Chapter 14
). Finally, some glycosyltransferases have two separate active sites with different substrate specificities. For example, the enzymes that synthesize the backbones of heparan sulfate (EXT1) and hyaluronan (HAS) have one active site that catalyzes the attachment of
N
-acetylglucosamine to glucuronic acid and another that attaches glucuronic acid to
N
-acetylglucosamine (
Chapters 16
and
17
). However, the examples described above are all exceptions to the generally strict donor, acceptor, and linkage specificity shown by most glycosyltransferases, a property that serves to define and limit the number and type of glycan structures observed in a given cell type or organism.
The glycosyltransferases that transfer monosaccharides or oligosaccharides directly to polypeptide or lipid moieties also show a high degree of substrate specificity and this will be discussed in more detail below for those involving polypeptide. Glycosyltransferases that initiate the synthesis of glycosphingolipids transfer a monosaccharide moiety to what was originally a serine residue in the ceramide lipid precursor of sphingolipids (see
Chapter 11
). Because different glycolipids have different ceramide moieties, it appears that some glycosyltransferases, such as the sialyltransferases, differentially recognize their substrates based on the nature of the ceramide moiety.
GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASES THAT RECOGNIZE THE PROTEIN MOIETY OF THEIR ACCEPTOR SUBSTRATES
The glycosyltransferases that transfer sugar directly to the polypeptide chain of a protein or glycoprotein recognize their acceptor substrates in a number of different ways. All eukaryotic N-glycans are initiated by oligosaccharyltransferase (OST), generally an ER-resident multisubunit enzyme that transfers en bloc Glc
3
Man
9
GlcNAc
2
to the side chain of asparagine residues in the sequence motif Asn-X-Ser/Thr (where X can be any amino acid except proline;
Chapter 9
). In contrast, the polypeptide GalNAc transferases, responsible for the initiation of mucin-type O-glycans, act after the protein has been folded and transported to the Golgi (
Chapter 10
). The polypeptide O-GalNAc transferases do not recognize a specific sequence motif and in general, they transfer
N
-acetyllgalactosamine to the side chain hydroxyl group of serine and threonine residues found in relatively unstructured regions of the folded protein. Some polypeptide O-GalNAc transferases possess a lectin domain that serves to direct the glycosyltransferase to regions of the polypeptide that already possess O-glycan chains. In this way, regions of polypeptide that have a high degree of O-glycan substitution, typical of mucin structures, can be synthesized.
In addition to the O-GalNAc linkage formed by the polypeptide O-GalNAc transferases, a number of other glycosyltransferases can glycosylate the side chain hydroxyl groups of serine
and threonine to generate O-GlcNAc, O-Fuc, O-Glc, O-Man, and O-Xyl linkages (
Chapters 13
,
17
, and
19
). Specificity for a particular serine or threonine residue is achieved in different ways. The xylosyltransferase that
O
-xylosylates a serine residue in chondroitin and heparan sulfate proteoglycans, for example, has an absolute requirement for a glycine residue carboxy-terminal to the serine and/or more acidic residues in the vicinity of the glycosylation site. In contrast, the O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT), responsible for adding
N
-acetylglucosamine to serine and threonine residues on thousands of nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins (
Chapter 19
), lacks any obvious consensus sequence associated with acceptor substrate binding specificity. See
Table 6.1
for some amino acid–consensus sequences or glycosylation motifs used in the formation of glycopeptide bonds.
TABLE 6.1.
Amino acid–consensus sequences or glycosylation motifs for the formation of glycopeptide bonds
Glycopeptide bond
Consensus sequence or peptide motif
N-linked:
GlcNAc-β-Asn
Asn-X-Ser/Thr (X = any amino acid except Pro)
Glc-β-Asn
Asn-X-Ser/Thr
O-linked:
GalNAc-α-Ser/Thr
repeat domains rich in Ser, Thr, Pro, Gly, Ala with no specific sequence
GlcNAc-α-Thr
Thr-rich domain near Pro residues
GlcNAc-β-Ser/Thr
Ser/Thr-rich domains near Pro, Val, Ala, Gly
EGF modules (Cys-X-X-G-X-Ser/Thr-G-X-X-Cys)
Man-α-Ser/Thr α
Ser/Thr-rich domains
Fuc-α-Ser/Thr
EGF modules (Cys-X-X-X-X-Ser/Thr-Cys) TSR modules (Cys-X-X-Ser/Thr-Cys-X-X-Gly)
Glc-β-Ser
EGF modules (Cys-X-Ser-X-Pro/Ala-Cys)
Xyl-β-Ser
Ser-Gly (in the vicinity of one or more acidic residues)
Glc/GlcNAc-Thr
Rho: Thr-37; Ras, Rac; Cdc42: Thr-35
Gal-Thr
Gly-X-Thr (X = Ala, Arg, Pro, Hyp, Ser) (vent worm)
Gal-β-Hyl
collagen repeats (X-Hyl-Gly)
Ara-α-Hyp
repetitive Hyp-rich domains (e.g., Lys-Pro-Hyp-Hyp-Val)
GlcNAc-Hyp
Skp1: Hyp-143
Glc-α-Tyr
glycogenin: Tyr-194
GlcNAc-α-1-P-Ser
Ser-rich domains (e.g., Ala-Ser-Ser-Ala)
Man-α-1-P-Ser
Ser-rich repeat domains
C-linked:
Man-α-
C
-Trp
Trp-X-X-Trp
Modified from Spiro RG. 2002.
Glycobiology
12:
43R–56R, by permission of Oxford University Press; see also Table 1.7.
EGF, epidermal growth factor; TSR, thrombospondin repeat; Hyp, hydroxyproline; Hyl, hydroxylysine; GPI, glycosylphosphatidylinositol; Ara, arabinose.
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-resident O-fucosyltransferases, POFUT1 and POFUT2, that specifically fucosylate epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like domains and thrombospondin type 1 repeats (TSRs), respectively (
Chapter 13
), differ fundamentally from most other glycosyltransferases. In addition to recognizing a specific sequence motif containing the target serine or threonine residue (
Table 6.1
), these enzymes only act on EGF-like domains and TSRs that are properly folded and disulfide-bonded. Glycosyltransferases that add O-Glc and O-GlcNAc to other serine and threonine residues in the EGF-like domain also exist and these enzymes also recognize a specific sequence motif and require a folded EGF-like domain.
A number of the glycan-elongating glycosyltransferases that act on glycoproteins also recognize the polypeptide moiety of their acceptor substrates. The glycoprotein hormone GalNAc transferase (a member of the family of β1-4GalNAcTs) provides an interesting example in which modification of an N-glycan is dependent on the presence of the protein sequence motif Pro-X-Arg/Lys positioned several amino acids amino-terminally to the N-glycan being
modified. The motif is typically followed closely by additional positively charged residues. The X-ray crystal structure of its acceptor substrate, human chorionic gonadotropin, shows that the Pro-X-Arg/Lys motif is at the beginning of a short surface-exposed helix that also contains the additional positively charged residues (
Figure 6.2
). The
N
-acetylgalactosamine residue transferred by this enzyme subsequently undergoes a biologically important 4-
O
-sulfation reaction that, in the case of luteinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone, generates a determinant recognized by specific liver clearance receptors that remove them from the blood (
Chapter 34
). Glycosyltransferases that only elongate the fucose moiety added by POFUT1 or POFUT2 also exist (
Chapter 13
). The specificity shown by these enzymes stems from their ability to recognize both the fucose moiety and the EGF-like and TSR components of their acceptor substrates. Additional examples of enzymes that elongate glycans on specific glycoprotein substrates include the polysialyltransferases that act on neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM) and neuropilin-2 (
Chapter 15
), and the N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase, EXTL3, that adds
N
-acetylglucosamine in α1-4-linkage to glucuronic acid in the first committed step to heparan sulfate biosynthesis on proteoglycans (
Chapter 17
).
FIGURE 6.2.
Human chorionic gonadotropin showing the determinants of recognition used by glycoprotein hormone N-acetylgalactosaminyl (GalNAc) transferase. Ribbon diagram of a fragment (residues 34–58) of human chorionic gonadotropin (PDB [protein data bank] ID 1HRP). The Pro40-Leu41-Arg42 tripeptide and residues Lys44 and Lys45 correspond to residues essential for recognition by glycoprotein hormone GalNAc transferase. Residues Asn52-Val53-Thr54 correspond to the N-glycosylation sequence motif of the N-glycan (at Asn52) modified by the glycoprotein hormone GalNAc transferase. Only the chitobiose core (GlcNAcβ1-4GlcNAc) of the full acceptor N-glycan is shown.
In a variation on this theme, GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase selectively modifies the N-glycans found on a large family of lysosomal enzymes that differ in three-dimensional structure and that lack any obvious and common protein sequence motif. In this case, modification by this enzyme has been shown to be dependent on lysine residues appropriately spaced and positioned relative to the N-glycan site (
Chapter 33
). The ER-resident glucosyltransferase, UGGT, is also able to transfer sugar to the N-glycans on a large but unique subset of glycoprotein substrates (
Chapter 39
). In this case, the enzyme adds a glucose moiety to the N-glycans of misfolded glycoproteins rendering them substrates for the ER-resident lectins calnexin and calreticulin. These lectins in turn recruit folding catalysts that promote correct disulfide bond formation and the
cis
–
trans
isomerization of proline residues.
GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASE SEQUENCE FAMILIES AND FOLD TYPES
Approximately 1% of genes in the mammalian genome are involved in the production or modification of glycans. More than 750,000 glycosyltransferase sequences are known across all kingdoms, and the numbers are growing rapidly. Based on sequence analysis, they have been categorized into more than 110 glycosyltransferase families as described in the Carbohydrate-Active Enzymes (CAZy) database (
Chapter 8
). Although the absence of significant sequence similarity between members of one family and another constitutes the basis for this classification, short sequence motifs common to the members of more than one family have been identified. These sequence elements are typically found among glycosyltransferases with a given donor substrate specificity; the sialyl motifs common to eukaryotic sialyltransferases are a good example (
Figure 6.3
). Sequence motifs common to galactosyltransferases, fucosyltransferases, and N-acetylglucosaminyltransferases have also been identified. In contrast, the so-called “DXD” motif (Asp–any residue–Asp) is not associated with any particular substrate specificity; this motif is involved in metal ion binding and catalysis as discussed in more detail below.
FIGURE 6.3.
Sialyl motifs. Domain structure of a typical sialyltransferase, showing the sialyl motifs shared by this family of enzymes. The sialyl L motif of 48–49 amino acids shares significant similarity among members and may be up to 65% identical in amino acid sequence. The sialyl S motif is smaller (∼23 amino acids) and diverges more among members of the family, with only two absolutely conserved residues. In both cases, identical residues are indicated, and residues showing similarity are denoted by parentheses. (
Asterisk
) Position of a highly conserved sequence H-X
4
-E. Additional conserved motifs may exist as well.
Despite the large number of sequence families that have been defined, structural analysis has shown that glycosyltransferases possess a limited number of fold types. To date, structures for 262 members representing 59 of the CAZy families have been determined by X-ray crystallography or cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM); of these, all but a few possess what have been termed the GT-A, GT-B, GT-C, and lysozyme-type folds (
Figure 6.4
). The GT-A and GT-B enzymes use nucleotide sugar donor substrates, whereas the GT-C and lysozyme-type enzymes use lipid-linked sugar donors. The GT-A fold glycosyltransferases appear to have evolved from a common ancestor harboring a ∼231 amino acid core structure and a conserved set of structural features. The core contains elements of the Rossmann fold, which mediates the interaction with the nucleotide sugar, as well as the generally conserved DXD motif responsible for divalent cation binding (usually Mn
++
or Mg
++
) and catalysis. Recent analysis has shown how the insertion of loops into the core structure has facilitated the acquisition, over evolutionary time, of the diverse acceptor specificities shown by the GT-A enzymes. The GT-B enzymes possess two distinct domains, and although the carboxy-terminal domain is primarily responsible for binding the nucleotide sugar donor substrate, both domains possess elements of the Rossmann fold. Acceptor substrates are typically bound in the cleft between the two domains, and unlike the GT-A enzymes, the GT-B glycosyltransferases are metal-ion-independent and do not possess a DXD motif. The GT-C fold enzymes are multi-spanning integral membrane proteins characterized by their use of lipid-linked sugar donors. Recent X-ray and cryo-EM structures are now providing important insights into how these enzymes mediate substrate binding and catalysis (
Figure 6.4
). Notable among them are the structures of both prokaryotic (PglB and AglB) and eukaryotic (yeast and human) oligosaccharyltransferases that have provided a model for N-glycosylation, a modification conserved across all three domains of life. Structural comparison among the GT-C glycosyltransferases has identified a conserved core of transmembrane helices involved in binding their polyisoprenoid(pyro)phosphate-sugar donors and a variable number of transmembrane- and nonmembrane-associated segments involved in acceptor interactions. The lysozyme-type glycosyltransferases (CAZy family 51) are involved in the biosynthesis of bacterial peptidoglycan and use lipid II (GlcNAc-MurNAc(pentapeptide)-undecaprenyl pyrophosphate) as donor substrate (
Chapter 21
). In addition to the lysozyme-type domain, these glycosyltransferases possess the jaw subdomain, which embeds in the extracellular face of the cytoplasmic membrane and provides access to the lipid II substrate. In a very recent advance, it has been shown that the dual activity glycosyltransferase-phosphorylases, important for the turnover of the storage polysaccharide mannogen and virulence in
Leishmania
parasites, possess a β-propeller fold catalytic domain not previously observed for a glycosyltransferase.
FIGURE 6.4.
Ribbon diagrams of representative GT-A, GT-B, GT-C, and lysozyme-type fold glycosyltransferases. The GT-A and GT-B structures correspond to those of rabbit β1-2 N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase I (PDB ID 1FOA) and T4 phage β-glucosyltransferase (PDB ID 1J39), respectively. In both cases, the bound nucleotide sugar donor substrate is shown in stick representation. The GT-C structure is that of
Campylobacter lari
oligosaccharyltransferase, PglB (PDB ID 3RCE), and the lysozyme-type structure is that of the
Staphylococcus aureus
bacterial peptidoglycan glycosyltransferase (PDB ID 2OLV) in complex with moenomycin (stick representation).
GLYCOSIDASES
Glycosidases are a very large group of enzymes with more than 870,000 members falling into more than 170 CAZy database families (
Chapter 8
). Unlike the glycosyltransferases, members of this family have evolved independently many times, a fact reflected in the diverse array of three-dimensional structures observed for these enzymes. Glycosidases play important roles in the degradation of glycan structures for the uptake and metabolism of sugars and for the
turnover of glycoconjugates in various cellular processes. Glycosidases are also involved in the formation of intermediates that are used as substrates for glycosyltransferases in the biosynthesis of glycans. The use of glycosidases in this way is particularly important in the biosynthesis of N-glycan-containing glycoproteins in more evolutionarily advanced eukaryotes and is thought to be associated with the acquisition of complex N-glycans during the evolution of multicellular organisms. In this case, the nascent glycoprotein glycan, Glc
3
Man
9
GlcNAc
2
-Asn, is trimmed by glucosidases and mannosidases in the ER and Golgi to generate substrates for the glycosyltransferases that lead to elaborated complex and hybrid-type N-glycans (
Chapter 9
). Glucosidase II, one of the two ER-resident glucosidases involved, also works in conjunction with UGGT during glycoprotein folding to allow repeated deglucosylation/reglucosylation during what has been termed the calnexin/calreticulin quality control cycle (
Chapter 39
). An interplay between glycosylation and deglycosylation is also found to occur with the O-GlcNAc moiety that appears in many nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins (transferred by O-GlcNAc transferase;
Chapter 19
). In this case, removal of the N-acetylglucosamine moiety by the glycosidase, O-GlcNAcase, provides a means of dynamically regulating the extent of O-GlcNAcylation and the diverse processes that it mediates.
CATALYTIC AND KINETIC MECHANISMS
Glycosyltransferases catalyze their reactions with either inversion or retention of stereochemistry at the anomeric carbon atom of the donor substrate (
Figure 6.5
). For example, β1-4 galactosyltransferase, an inverting glycosyltransferase, transfers galactose from UDP-α-Gal to generate a β1-4-linked galactose-containing product. Inversion of stereochemistry follows from the fact that the enzyme uses an S
N
2 (
s
ubstitution nucleophilic bimolecular) reaction mechanism in which an acceptor hydroxyl group attacks the anomeric carbon atom of UDP-Gal from one side and UDP leaves from the other (
Figure 6.5A
). Typically, enzymes of this type possess an aspartate, glutamate, or histidine residue whose side chain serves to partially deprotonate the incoming acceptor hydroxyl group (acting as a general base), rendering it a better nucleophile (as shown in
Figure 6.6
for the β1-4 galactosyltransferase). Additional structures for GT-B fold inverting glycosyltransferases have been identified in which such a base appears to be lacking. In these cases, a water-mediated proton-shuttle mechanism has been proposed to achieve the required acceptor deprotonation. In addition, these enzymes possess features that help to promote leaving-group departure. In the GT-A enzymes, a metal ion, bound by the DXD motif, is typically positioned to interact with the diphosphate moiety. The positively charged metal ion serves to electrostatically stabilize the additional negative charge that develops on the terminal phosphate moiety of the UDP leaving group during breakage of the sugar-phosphate bond of the donor substrate (
Figure 6.6
). In the few GT-A enzymes that are not metal-ion-dependent, positively charged side chains stabilize the leaving group, a strategy also used by some of the GT-B-fold enzymes.
FIGURE 6.5.
Schematic representation of inverting and retaining catalytic mechanisms. (
A
) S
N
2-like attack of the acceptor leads to inversion of stereochemistry at C1 of the donor sugar (the anomeric carbon). For a glycosidase reaction, R
2
would correspond to a proton (i.e., attack by water as a nucleophile) and R
1
would be the remainder of the glycoside (the so-called aglycone). A and B label general acid and base groups in the catalytic site of the enzyme. For a glycosyltransferase reaction, R
2
would correspond to the remainder of the acceptor substrate and R
1
would typically be the nucleoside monophosphate or diphosphate moiety of the donor substrate. For the latter, a general acid/base residue is typically not required and other mechanisms that assist leaving-group departure operate (see text). (
B
) This mechanism has only been established for glycosidases. The so-called “double-displacement” mechanism involving two successive S
N
2-like reactions separated by a glycosyl-enzyme intermediate leads to retention of the configuration at anomeric C1. For a glycosidase reaction, R
1
corresponds to the remainder of the glycoside/aglycone and R
2
to a proton. For a glycosyltransferase, R
1
corresponds to the leaving group and R
2
to the acceptor. Nu labels a residue that could act as a nucleophile for the first S
N
2. (
C
) An S
N
i or S
N
i-like dissociative, same/front-side mechanism in which the leaving group “guides” the nucleophilic acceptor to the same face of the anomeric carbon with resulting retention of anomeric configuration. Substrate-assisted acceptor deprotonation by the β-phosphate of the donor leaving group has been proposed. For a glycosyltransferase, R
1
corresponds to the leaving group (and so the oxygen that guides is a phosphate) and R
2
corresponds to the acceptor.
FIGURE 6.6.
Catalytic site of bovine β1-4 galactosyltransferase. Composite figure shows selected residues/atoms of the superimposition of the donor complex (PDB ID 1TW1) on the acceptor complex (PDB ID 1TW5). O4 designates the C4 hydroxyl group of the GlcNAcβ1-4GlcNAc acceptor substrate positioned for in-line S
N
2 attack (
arrow
) on C1 of the UDP-Gal donor substrate. The carboxylate form of D318 serves to act as a base to partially deprotonate the C4 hydroxyl group rendering it a better nucleophile. The positively charged Mg
++
ion coordinates the two phosphates of the UDP leaving group, promoting cleavage of the C1–OP
β
bond by stabilizing the additional negative charge that develops on P
β
of the leaving group. D252-V253-D254 corresponds to the DXD motif in bovine β1-4 galactosyltransferase.
Although the mechanisms used by retaining glycosyltransferases remain open, initial catalytic models based on glycosidase mechanisms (see below) proposed a double-displacement mechanism (
Figure 6.5B
). In this case, a nucleophile (e.g., an aspartic acid or glutamic acid side chain) in the enzyme active site makes the first attack with inversion of anomeric configuration, followed by a second attack (on a glycosyl-enzyme intermediate) and inversion, to give overall retention of stereochemistry. However, no enzyme-associated catalytic nucleophile has yet been identified for a retaining glycosyltransferase and attempts to trap and study glycosyltransferase covalent reaction intermediates have not yet clearly supported this mechanism. Thus, while a “double-displacement” mechanism cannot yet be discounted and/or may be limited to specific families of glycosyltransferases, other mechanisms have been proposed. In several cases, retaining glycosyltransferases appear to position the hydroxyl nucleophile of the acceptor adjacent to the β-phosphate group of the donor nucleotide. Substrate-assisted acceptor deprotonation by the donor phosphate has been proposed with a dissociative, same/front-side mechanism in which the leaving group “guides” the nucleophilic acceptor to the same face of the anomeric carbon with resulting retention of anomeric configuration for the resulting glycosidic bond (
Figure 6.5C
). This S
N
i or S
N
i-like mechanism is supported by computational modeling and, in specific cases, by kinetic analyses and X-ray crystal structures of transition-state analog inhibitor complexes.
On the basis of much structural and enzyme kinetic analysis, it is well established that inverting glycosidases proceed via a single S
N
2 displacement mechanism (
Figure 6.5A
), whereas retaining glycosidases use a double-displacement mechanism involving a covalent glycosyl-enzyme intermediate (
Figure 6.5B
). In the double-displacement mechanism, an aspartic acid or glutamic acid side chain in the enzyme active site makes the first attack and inversion, followed by a second water-mediated attack (on the glycosyl-enzyme intermediate) and inversion, to give overall retention of stereochemistry. Using mechanism-based inhibitors, the glycosyl-enzyme intermediate has been trapped and studied by X-ray crystallography for a number of glycosidases.
Many glycosyltransferases have been shown to possess a Bi-Bi sequential kinetic mechanism in which the donor substrate binds before the acceptor substrate, and the glycosylated acceptor is released before the nucleoside monophosphate or diphosphate, depending on the reaction. Such kinetics are readily explained by a structural model in which the active site represents a deep pocket, with the nucleotide sugar substrate at the bottom and the acceptor substrate stacked on top. If the acceptor substrate was to bind first, it would sterically preclude donor substrate binding and, as such, catalysis would not occur. Because of the stacked arrangement, it also follows that release of the glycosylated product must precede release of the nucleotide leaving group. Although largely consistent with such a model, the X-ray crystal structures of glycosyltransferase-substrate complexes also show that substrate-dependent ordering of flexible loops is a feature common to glycosyltransferases. Typically, donor substrate binding orders a
loop(s) that in turn facilitates acceptor substrate binding. Moreover, loop ordering may serve to exclude bulk water from the active site, a strategy proposed to be used by most enzymes to create an active site environment that reduces the energy of the transition state and promotes catalysis. For glycosyltransferases, this would also serve to remove waters as a competing hydrolytic nucleophile, thereby favoring the acceptor substrate.
SULFATION AND OTHER MODIFICATIONS
The sulfotransferases are a large family of enzymes found in both the cytoplasm and the Golgi. Sulfotransferases play a particularly important role in the production of glycosaminoglycans (
Chapter 17
) and the formation of L-selectin ligands, glycans, and glycoconjugates required for the trafficking of lymphocytes across high-endothelial venules in lymph nodes (
Chapter 34
). All sulfotransferases use 3′-phospho-adenosine-5′-phosphosulfate (PAPS) as the sulfate donor (
Chapter 5
). Although the sequence similarity among sulfotransferases can be very low, they all possess conserved sequence motifs responsible for binding the 5′ and 3′ phosphate groups of PAPS. Moreover, structural analysis has shown that all of the sulfotransferases solved, to date, possess the same basic structure. Mechanistically, the enzyme proceeds via an S
N
2-like reaction, with the hydroxyl group of the acceptor making an in-line attack on the sulfate group, although it should be understood that substitution at sulfur may be mechanistically very different to that at carbon. Structural studies and mutagenesis have shown that a histidine residue serves to activate the hydroxyl nucleophile and that a lysine residue assists in stabilizing the PAP leaving group. Interestingly, a conserved serine residue seems to be involved in modulating the activity of these enzymes to prevent PAPS hydrolysis in the absence of acceptor substrate, another example of the need for enzymes to control the role of the competing water.
Phosphorylation of sugar residues by ATP-dependent kinases occurs at C-2 of
O
-xylose in proteoglycans (
Chapter 17
) and at the C-6 position of
O
-mannose in α-dystroglycan after the mannose has been further glycosylated (
Chapter 13
). Phosphoglycosylation (or glycophosphorylation), a process in which a sugar phosphoryl is transferred from a nucleotide sugar donor directly to a serine residue on a protein (e.g., GlcNAc-P-serine and Man-P-serine), occurs in
Dictyostelium
and
Leishmania
, respectively. In eukaryotic cells, mannose-6-phosphate on the N-glycans of lysosomal enzymes occurs by a two-step process involving UDP-GlcNAc as the phosphate donor. In the first step, GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase uses UDP-GlcNAc to generate GlcNAcα1-P-6-Manα1-(N-glycan), and in the second step the
N
-acetylglucosamine moiety is removed by a second enzyme to give P-6-Manα1-(N-glycan) (
Chapter 33
).
Glycan
O
-acetylation occurs in bacteria and plants and the
O
-acetylation of sialic acids is found in bacteria, parasites, and vertebrates. The structure of a plant acetyltransferase suggests the use of a catalytic triad and a double-displacement mechanism for acetyl group transfer analogous to esterases and serine proteases. CASD1, the sialate O-acetyltransferase (SOAT) in humans is a multi-spanning membrane protein with a globular extramembranous catalytic domain. The enzyme transfers the acetyl group from acetyl-CoA to CMP-Neu5Ac. As such, it is the sialytransferase-mediated delivery of 9-
O
-acetylated sialic to acceptor substrates that leads to the 9-
O
-acetylated glycoconjugates observed. 9-
O
-acetylated sialic acid plays a role in CD22 signaling, a process regulated by the opposing action of a sialate 9-
O
-acetylesterase (SIAE). It also serves as receptor or coreceptor for influenza C and a number of coronaviruses.
N
-Deacetylation of
N
-acetylglucosamine residues to glucosamine occurs during heparin/heparan sulfate formation (
Chapter 17
), lipopolysaccharide assembly (
Chapters 21
and
22
), and GPI-anchor synthesis (
Chapter 12
). The bacterial enzyme is zinc-dependent, but in-depth studies of the vertebrate N-deacetylases have not been performed.
N
-Deacetylation of
N
-acetylneuraminic acid (the most common sialic acid) has also been reported (
Chapter 15
).
Finally, glycans can be modified in many other ways, including pyruvylation (e.g., in the formation of
N
-acetylmuramic acid;
Chapters 21
and
22
), the addition of ethanolamine phosphate (e.g., during GPI-anchor synthesis;
Chapter 12
), and alkylation, deoxygenation, and halogenation in microbial glycans. All of these reactions are catalyzed by unique transferases or oxidoreductases and represent areas of active research.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors appreciate helpful comments and suggestions from David Vocadlo, Mike Ferguson, Susan Bellis, and Tetsuya Okajima.
FURTHER READING
Roseman S. 2001. Reflections on glycobiology.
J Biol Chem
276
: 41527–41542. doi:
10.1074/jbc.R100053200
Lairson LL, Henrissat B, Davies GJ, Withers SG. 2008. Glycosyltransferases: structures, functions, and mechanisms.
Annu Rev Biochem
77
: 521–555. doi:
10.1146/annurev.biochem.76.061005.092322
Schwarz F, Aebi M. 2011. Mechanisms and principles of N-linked protein glycosylation.
Curr Opin Struct Biol
21
: 576–582. doi:
10.1016/j.sbi.2011.08.005
Bennett EP, Mandel U, Clausen H, Gerken TA, Fritz TA, Tabak LA. 2012. Control of mucin-type O-glycosylation: a classification of the polypeptide GalNAc-transferase gene family.
Glycobiology
22
: 736–756. doi:
10.1093/glycob/cwr182
Hurtado-Guerrero R, Davies GJ. 2012. Recent structural and mechanistic insights into post-translational enzymatic glycosylation.
Curr Opin Chem Biol
16
: 479–487. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpa.2012.10.013
Albesa-Jové D, Giganti D, Jackson M, Alzari PM, Guerin ME. 2014. Structure–function relationships of membrane-associated GT-B glycosyltransferases.
Glycobiology
24
: 108–124. doi:
10.1093/glycob/cwt101
Janetzko J, Walker S. 2014. The making of a sweet modification: structure and function of O-GlcNAc transferase.
J Biol Chem
289
: 34424–34432. doi:
10.1074/jbc.R114.604405
Speciale G, Thompson AJ, Davies GJ, Williams SJ. 2014. Dissecting conformational contributions to glycosidase catalysis and inhibition.
Curr Opin Struct Biol
28
: 1–13. doi:
10.1016/j.sbi.2014.06.003
Moremen KW, Haltiwanger RS. 2019. Emerging structural insights into glycosyltransferase-mediated synthesis of glycans.
Nat Chem Biol
15
: 853–864. doi:
10.1038/s41589-019-0350-2
Bai L, Li H. 2020. Protein N-glycosylation and O-mannosylation are catalyzed by two evolutionarily related GT-C glycosyltransferases.
Curr Opin Struct Biol
68
: 66–73. doi:
10.1016/j.sbi.2020.12.009
Taujale R, Venkat A, Huang L-C, Yeung W, Rasheed K, Edison AS, Moremen KW, Kannan N. 2020. Deep evolutionary analysis reveals the design principles of fold A glycosyltransferases.
eLife
9
: e54532. doi:
10.7554/eLife.54532